 

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
AUGS/AGSR Division

 

 

 

Date: 08-Feb-2021
COURSE HANDOUT (PART II

In addition to part I (General Handout for all courses appended to the Timetable), this portion

gives further specific details regarding the course.

Course No. : BIO F243

Course Title : GENETICS

Instructor-in-Charge : MANOJ KANNAN

Instructor : SHILPI GARG

1. Scope and objectives of the course:

The course aims at presenting concepts of modern genetics and its applications in biotechnology.

Beginning with a background of classical genetics including basic models of inheritance,

microbial and phage genetics, the course moves on to molecular genetics - structure and function

of nucleic acid, mutations, DNA repair and recombination, that will provide the basis for

understanding expression and regulation of genes in prokaryotes and eukaryotes, human

genetics and genomics, non-nuclear inheritance and population genetics. Finally, the course also

presents selected applications of these topics in the field of biotechnology.

2. Text Book:

Tamarin, Robert H. Principles of Genetics (7/e). New Delhi: Tata McGraw-Hill, 2002.

3. Reference Books:

 

Klug, William S., et. al. Concepts of Genetics (10/e). Chennai: Pearson India Education
Services Pvt. Ltd., 2019.

Das, H.K. (ed.). Gene and Its Engineering. New Delhi: Wiley India Pvt. Ltd., 2014.
Brooker, Robert. Genetics: Analysis and Principles (4/e). New York: McGraw-Hill, 2011.

Hartwell, Leland et. al. Genetics: From Genes to Genomes (International edition). New
York: McGraw-Hill, 2004.

Cummings, Michael R. Human Genetics (India edition). New Delhi: Cengage Learning
India Pvt. Ltd., 2009.

Freifelder, David. Microbial Genetics (2/e). New Delhi: Narosa Publishing House, 2009.

 

innovate

 
AUGS/AGSR Division

 

Lecture Session Details

Lecture 1: Getting introduced to
genetics
Introduction to genetics;

orientation to the course

Lectures 2-4: Mendel and Extensions
to Mendel

Basic modes of heredity;
Mendelian genetics and its
extensions: gene interactions,

multiple allelism

Lectures 5-6: Other inheritance
patterns
Sex-linked Inheritance; human

pedigree analysis

Lectures 7-9: Linkage and mapping in
Eukaryotes

Diploid mapping; two point test
cross, three point test cross;
haploid Mapping (tetrad analysis);

somatic crossing over

Lectures 10-12: Linkage and mapping

in Prokaryotes

Bacterial transformation: detection,

competence, DNA uptake and

transformation mapping; bacterial

conjugation: Hfr transfer,
recombination in recipient cells,

and conjugation mapping

 

 

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani

 

Learning Outcomes

e To construct crosses from the given

problem statement

e To predict phenotypes and
genotypes of a given cross, as well

as the probability of each outcome

e To infer what is the underlying
gene interaction that operates

resulting in the given phenotype

e To be able to infer the type of
inheritance (dominant/recessive;
autosomal/sex-linked) given a
pedigree chart

e To construct pedigree chart from

the given problem statement

e To be able to designate gene
symbols in Drosophila

e To calculate the map distances
between loci, given the offspring

data of diploids and haploids

e To be able to differentiate between
the various modes of gene transfer

in bacteria and phages

e To calculate the map distances

between genes in bacteria

innovate Feleual civic}

 
 

 

  
  
 
   
    
  
 

AUGS/AGSR Division

Lectures 13-15: Phage genetics
Genetic recombination in phages;

Fine structure of T4 rII locus;

Transduction: DNA transfer, cotransduction, linkage mapping,

mapping by co-transduction

Lectures 16-18: Chemistry of Gene
Nucleic acids and their structures;
supercoiling DNA replication in

prokaryotes and Eukaryotes

Lectures 19-22: Gene Expression
principles

Transcription in prokaryotes and
eukaryotes; RNA splicing and
RNA editing; translation in

prokaryotes and eukaryotes

Lectures 23-25: DNA: Mutation,
Repair and Recombination

Fluctuation test and genetic fine

structure; Spontaneous vs. induced

mutations; DNA repair, damage
reversal, excision repair and
double strand break repair;

Recombination

Lectures 26-29: Regulation of gene
expression in Prokaryotes
Operon model: lac and trp

operons;

Lytic and lysogenic cycles in phage

lambda; post-transcriptional

regulation

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani

e To calculate co-transduction
frequencies and hence estimate the
relative gene order between

bacterial genes

e To compare and contrast the
mechanisms and machinery of
replication, transcription and
translation between prokaryotes

and eukaryotes

e To learn about various types of

mechanisms how mutations occur

e To predict the type and
consequences of mutations at the

protein and organism level

e To understand the control circuity
operation in operons

e To predict whether a given operon
will be inducible or repressible, or

constitutive, given the host

genotype

  

 

innovate

 
 
   

AUGS/AGSR Division

Lectures 30-32: Organization of
genetic material in eukaryotes
Packaging of DNA in eukaryotes;
repetitive and unique sequences;
split and overlapping genes;

genome organization

Lectures 33-35: Regulation of gene
expression in Eukaryotes

Control of transcription in
eukaryotes; chromatin remodeling
and epigenetics; transposable

elements; cancer genetics

Lectures 36-37: Non-nuclear
inheritance
Maternal effects and cytoplasmic

inheritance

Lectures 38-39: Recent advances in
genetics

Guest lectures may be held

 

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani

e To compare and contrast the gene
structure and genome organization

of eukaryotes and prokaryotes

e To understand the varying layers of
control that exist in eukaryotic gene

expression

e To understand how combinatorial

control works in eukaryotes

e To understand how non-nuclear
inheritance differs from the typical

Mendelian inheritance patterns

e To know the relative strengths and
weaknesses of various model
organisms used by modern genetics

researchers

 

 
 
 

Evaluation
Component

weightage)
90 min. 50 (25%) 01-Mar-2021
9:00 to 10:30 AM
60 (30%) | 01-May-2021 FN

60 (30%) See Note (i) below
10 (5%) See Note (ii) below

pe 20 (10%) Po. See Note (iii) below
Up to 4
See Note (iv) below

 

Mid-semester Test

 
 

Comprehensive
Examination

Team-based

   

Learning activities

  
 
    

Learning Portfolio
Class Participation

and Initiative

Bonus credit
marks (2%)

    

 

innovate

 
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
AUGS/AGSR Division

 

 

 

 

Notes:

(i) Teams have the power to drive powerful forms of learning, more than individuals working
alone and even more than groups. Hence a substantial part of the work in this course will be
done in teams. Team-based Learning includes both individual components and team-based
components as detailed below:

e Individual Readiness Assessment Tests (iRATs) = 20 marks
e Team RATs (tRATs), Team Project and Peer evaluation = 40 marks

The adjusted team score would incorporate the peer evaluation multiplier as well.

(ii) A Learning Portfolio is an in-depth analysis of yourself as a learner in a particular learning
situation, in this case — in this course. In the second half of the course, you will be asked to
create a learning portfolio. The structure of a Learning Portfolio is as follows:

e Reflective Narrative (5-10 pages)
e Appendices: Documents, etc., that support that comments about learning discussed in

the Narrative

Key Questions to be addressed in the narrative:

1. WHAT did you learn in this course?
a. Of the major learning goals for the course, and you will honestly describe to what

degree you believe you achieved each one.

b. What Foundational Knowledge did you acquire? Application? Integration, etc.

2. HOW did you learn?
a. What helped you learn? What didn’t?

b. What does this tell you about yourself as a learner? About the learning process
itself?

3. What is the VALUE to you, of what you learned?
a. For your: Personal life? Social interactions? Civic responsibilities? Professional

life?

4. Whatis your PLAN for FUTURE LEARNING?
a. WHAT ELSE do you want to learn?

b. HOW would you learn THAT?

(iii) In-class quizzes (using Socrative tool) will be held regularly throughout the semester. Giving
these and showing active participation during the classes (say, by asking questions and
responding to the instructor, interacting across the teams during the TBL sessions) would

count toward the Class Participation and Initiative.

innovate

 
6.

as

10.

 

LT
ly

A BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
= AUGS/AGSR Division

 

 

 

(iv) Visiting during chamber consultation hour, appraising the instructor personally of one’s
learning and progress are some items that qualify for fetching bonus credit. Any other act or
gesture that demonstrates one’s proactive approach would also be counted, subjected to the

discretion of the instructor.

Academic Conduct Policy:
It is expected that all students follow the highest standard of academic practice when

participating in any evaluation component. Having a zero-tolerance for academic dishonesty,
any case of misconduct, however minor, will be dealt with appropriately, and may be reported

to the Examination Committee for necessary administrative action.

. Grading Policy:

Award of grades would be guided by the histogram of marks and course average. If a student
does not give sufficient opportunity for being assessed by the instructor, either by missing an
evaluation component (listed in the Evaluation Scheme specified in item 5) entirely, or by not
applying oneself to the task seriously, he/she may be awarded ‘NC’ report. For a student on the

borderline of two grades, the bonus credit would be used for increasing the grade, if required.

. Make-up Policy:

If a student misses any of the evaluation components due to a genuine reason (serious medical
causes leading to hospitalization, personal/family emergencies or absence from classes due to
official purposes) there exists a provision to apply for make-up. Due to their nature, make-up for
in-class activities cannot be sought. However, in case of a genuine case, Prior permission must be
taken from the Instructor-in-Charge whenever possible, before applying; otherwise, he must be
informed at the earliest after missing the component. The decision to grant make-up is taken by

the Instructor-in-Charge and shall be final.
Chamber consultation hour: To be announced in class by the instructors.

Course Announcements and Notices:

All announcements regarding the course will be made in the lecture classes or by email.

Instructor-in-Charge
BIO F243

innovate

 
