 

SECOND SEMESTER 2020-21

COURSE HANDOUT

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

Date: 16/01/2021

In addition to part -I (General Handout for all courses appended to the time table) this portion gives
further specific details regarding the course.

Course No. : BIO G545
Course Title : Molecular Parasitology & Vector Biology
Instructor-incharge : VISHAL SAXENA

1. Course Description: The course explores in detail the biology of various parasitic diseases and their
transmission in human and animal population by vectors (carriers). This course will give insight to
the students into some frontier areas in molecular aspects of parasite and vector biology, modes of
infection, life cycles of parasite and vector, host - parasite interactions, infectivity pattern,
mechanisms of drug resistance and immune evasion, methods of diagnosis, prophylaxis, treatments
to parasitic diseases and vector control measures.

2. Scope and Objective of the Course: This course is ideal for students willing to gain additional
training prior to embarking on a research career in medical or molecular biology of parasites and
their corresponding vectors, their immunology and host- pathogen interactions. The course also helps
enhance knowledge of students who foresee their future career in medical sciences and related
administrative services.

3. Text Book (TB): Cox, F. E. G., "Modern Parasitology", 2nd Edition, Blackwell Science, 2004.

4, Reference Books:
R1: Bogitsh, B.J., Carter, C.E., Oeltmann, T.N., "Human Parasitology", Elsevier, 3rd Ed., 2005.
R2: Thomas C. Cheng. General Parasitology, Elsevier, IInd Ed., 2010.

5. Course Plan:

Module Learning Ref. cab Learning

Lectures Introduction — to Knowledge of
Infectious *aiscascs and causative animal

organisms, Classification of various classification

disease causing parasites and _ their
transmission vectors

Lectures 4 — 11: Life cycles of
Plasmodium, Leishmania, Trypanosoma,
Nematodes and their mode of infection. | TB1: 1, 2;
Life cycle and mode of infection of | Ref.
Dengue. Physiology and nutrition of | Material
parasites. Diseases progressions and its

signs and symptoms.

Parasites &
their vectors

Understanding of Life
cycles and living
habitat conditions of
parasites and their
disease

Biology of
protozoan
and helminth
parasites

Biology of

parasite
vectors

A Save Paper.
ee. Save Trees.
¢”>~ -’Save the World.

Lectures 12 — 16: Life cycles of
Mosquitoes (Anopheles, Aedes &
Culex) Tsetse fly, Sandfly. Indigenous
flora of the vector & its effect on
pathogen development and transmission

Understanding

of Life cycles

and living

habitat conditions of
vectors/ hosts

 

 

Please Do Not Print Unless Necessary
 

  
   
  

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

Lectures 17 — 24: Molecular biology Knowledge
of host — parasite interactions Host about molecules
immune response to protozoan and involved in hosthelminthes parasites and viruses — parasite interactions
antigenic variations, parasitic diseases
and virulence, and immuno-pathology
Lectures 25 — 28: Identification of , Understanding
Methods of | parasites, clinical and molecular Renew of Diagnostic
; ; ; cles and ;
diagnostics | diagnostics, techniques used for study Lectin techniques
and research | of host-parasite interactions, molecular
research techniques.
Lectures 29 — 36: Drugs against Knowledge on
various Therapeutic aspects
parasitic diseases, their modes of action and
and limitations, drug _ resistance, | TB1:9, 10 disease
vaccinations; vector control measures, prevention
health education; discovery and measures
development of new drugs
Advancesin | Lectures 37— 41: Parasite Genomics,
parasite advances in parasite genome databases,

 
  

parasite
interactions

   

notes

Parasite
chemotherapy
and vector
control

  

Knowledge
about recent

Research

Revi .
biology systems biology, techniques to parasite ane neview advancements in

research in-vitro and in-vivo studies. research

Additional references will be given from time to time. The course has Lab components which
will be planned as per time and chemical availability.

6. Evaluation Scheme:

Component | Duration | Wtg. (%) Date & Time
3
1

Mid-term test | 90 minutes Partly Closed & Open

Book

Seminar/ Variable 10+5 Open Book
Assignments

Comprehensive 3 hrs. 45 Partly CB & OB
Examination

7. Chamber C onsultation Hours: To be announced in the class.

8. Notice: Notices for tests will be displayed on Biological Sciences Notice Board. Quizzes will
be unannounced.

9. Makeup Policy: Makeups for quizzes, seminar or assignment will not be granted. Make-ups
for Tests will be granted only in case of severe medical urgency or hospitalization.

0
0

 

Instructor-in-charge
BIO G545

 

 

A Save Paper. ;
ae. Save Trees.
>> Asave the World. —_ or

Please Do Not Print Unless Necessary
