 

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/AGSR Division

 

 

 

 

Second semester 2020-2021 Date: January 25", 2021

COURSE HANDOUT (PART-II)
In addition to part-I (General Handout for all courses appended to the timetable) this portion gives further specific

details regarding the course.
Course No. : BIO F110
Course Title : BIOLOGY LABORATORY

Instructor-in-charge : Meghana Tare

Course Description:

Understanding Biological sciences, analysis and estimation of biomolecules, preparation of temporary slides for
microscopic analysis, study of cell structure and division, investigation of catalytic activity of enzyme, physiology
of plant and animal systems, diversity of living systems.

Scope and Objective of the course:

The major objective of this course is to offer a hands-on experience on fundamental aspects of practical biology. The
student would observe and understand various biological phenomena and also be equipped with some simple
techniques which form the basis of research in biology. The course has been revised to run parallel to General Biology
classes.

Text Book/Manual: Laboratory Manual for Biology, BITS Pilani 2014, revised, 2019.

Reference Book: Simon, E.J. et al: Campbell Essential Biology with Physiology (5" Edition, BITS Pilani custom
edition). Noida: Perason India Education Services Pvt. Ltd., 2015

Experiment Plan

Experiment No. Name of the Experiment Learning Outcome

Experiment—1: | Photosynthesis Lab: To study Photosynthesis in | Understanding the process of photosynthesis,
the leaves observing it happen in the lab, importance of

different conditions governing photosynthesis.
Experiment-2: Transpiration Lab: Preparation of temporary Understanding the role of stomata in controlling
mount of leaf epidermis to study the structure of | transpiration in plants. Transpiration rate and

stomata and measurement of transpiration rate factors affecting it.

Experiment — 3: Transport Lab: To study the phenomenon of Effect of tonicity of a solution on different cell
EE TNS [smolineninped. | ypeemosbe omoguaton
Experiment — 4: DNA Lab: To extract total genomic DNA from | Basic knowledge about the genetic matenial,
ae eee gs |pincglet ian
Experiment—5: | Electrophoresis Lab: Visualizing DNA using gel | Understand characterization of DNA based on
eee cn dempnes | leap snyder

 

 

A Save Paper.
as. Save Trees.
£ * 4Save the World.

innovate

Please Do Not Print Unless Necessary
   
  
     
 

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/AGSR Division

A EE eee
Experiment — 6: Mitosis Lab: Measurement of mitotic index and | Understanding different phases of cell division,
duration of mitosis in the given plant tissue. different factors affecting it and preparation of
Observation of various stages of mitosis through | slides to view mitosis in a plant meristematic tissue.
permanent slides.

Experiment — 7: Protein Lab: Measurement of total Protein content | Proteins: the building blocks; their role in humans;
ecceee err he sivensemple by Lowy’ method. methods to quantify proteins in different samples.
Experiment — 8: Enzyme Lab: To study the effect of the enzyme Properties of an enzyme and chromogenic

ee wena (amd

Experiment — Physiology Lab: Measurement of haemoglobin | Blood group incompatibility genetics behind blood
content in the human blood and determination of | group inheritance, hemoglobin and its importance;
blood group and Rh status. Blood typing.

    
  

    
   
 

  

Evaluation Scheme: Evaluations will be based on laboratory experiments and their manuals and materials provided
by the Instuctors.

S. No. Evaluation component Duration | Date, time Marks & Nature of
Day to . Evaluation (Attendance+ Daily Lab 54%

Surprise nacre (multiple) 16%
minutes

Comprchensive Evan TBA

Notices: Notices will be displayed on Nalanda/Google Classroom.

 

Make up Policy:

No make ups will be granted for Daily Labs. Genuine cases such as hospitalization, (upon production of the relevant
documents as records/ proof) will be considered upon discussion with team for any make ups for the final Exam.

Instructor-in-C harge
BIO F110

 

 

Save Paper.
gee) Save Trees.
£ > Save the World. a

Please Do Not Print Unless Necessary
