BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

SECOND SEMESTER 2020-21
COURSE HANDOUT

 

Date: 15.01.2021

In addition to part I (General Handout for all courses appended to the Time table) this portion gives further specific
details regarding the course.

Course No : BIO F315
Course Title : APPLIED NUTRITION AND NUTRACEUTICALS
Instructor-in-C harge : Dr. Sudeshna Mukherjee (sudeshna@ pilani.bits-pilani.ac.in)

Instructor(s) : Prof. P. R. Deepa (deepa@ pilani.bits-pilani.ac.in)

1. Course Description:

This course will provide a broad framework for understanding the significance of food and nutrition to human health
and well-being. Beginning with basic concepts in nutritional biochemistry & microbiology, this course will expand
into applied nutrition themes — malnutrition — under-nutrition versus over-nutrition, nutrigenomics, clinical
nutrition, functional foods & nutraceuticals, food safety and security. The course will also include themes such as
industrial development of functional and genotype-specific foods and beverages (example, infant-food
formulations), fortified foods, phytochemicals, nutritional databases & personalized nutritional plan, using suitable
case- studies.

2. Scope and Objective of the Course:

This course is designed to provide insight in the basic concepts as well recent advances in the area of nutrition related
to human health. At the end of the course, students will be able to: a. Inter-relate concepts learned in
Biology/Chemistry/Pharmacy courses and will appreciate their integration in human nutrition and in disease therapy.
They can understand how some nutrients ‘promote’ health or ‘affect’ health (nutritional toxicology), through their
molecular/gene interactions. Appreciate mechanism of action of functional foods, nutraceuticals and dietary
supplements. Explore how certain diseases (cardiovascular diseases, diabetes, cancers, obesity, inborn errors of
metabolism) can be managed by nutritional approach. Appreciate the growing strategic collaborations/alliances
between food and pharma companies — immense potential in research and product development/innovations in
food biotechnology and nutraceuticals. Realize the immense role that India can play in the growing

nutraceutical/functional foods industry, given the knowledge that is available in traditional systems of medicine.
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

 

3. Text Books:
i). Textbook of Biochemistry & Human Biology, Third Edition, 2002 (Ed: GP Talwar & LM

Srivastava), Prentice Hall India.

ii). Harper’s Illustrated Biochemistry 31% Edition, 2018, McGraw Hill [Authors: Robert Murray, et
al.]

iii). Introduction to Human Nutrition, Second Edition, 2009 [ Edited on behalf of The Nutrition
Society by Michael J Gibney, Susan A Lanham-New, Aedin Cassidy, Hester H Vorster], Wiley
Blackwell Publication.

4, Reference Books:
i) Clinical Nutrition. 2nd edition, Marinos Elia, Olle Ljungqvist, Rebecca J Stratton and

Susan A Lanham-New, 2013.
ii) Relevant review articles/ research articles will be discussed in class to enhance

coverage of select topics.

5. Course Plan:

Module | Lecture
No. Session

Reference Learning

outcomes

Module No.

L#1-2:
Introduction —

Broad spectrum
view of applied

nutrition

L#3-5:
Food
Microbiology

L#6-13:
Nutritional

Biochemistry in

Health and
Disease

Definitions — Food, nutrient, balanced diet,
food pyramid, malnutrition (under/over
nutrition). Food, Nutrients and Energy
Metabolism. Chirality of biomolecules —
pharma applications. A ge-dependent
nutritional needs Special nutritional needs
(maternal nutrition, high altitude
nutrition). Applications — Food
biotechnology, Nutraceuticals, Clinical
Nutrition, Nutritional deficiencies/toxicity
and Public Health.

Microorganisms in food spoilage, food
borne diseases, food fermentation, food
Safety.

Macromolecules — Integration of topics
related to carbohydrate/lipid and energy
metabolism, protein and amino acids Enzyme & Hormonal Regulation —
Potential Clinical/Pharmacologic Targets
(in metabolic syndrome, diabetes, cancer,
cardiovascular disease).

Micronutrients - Deficiency and Toxicity
conditions.

Chap 33-35,
37-39, TB1;
Chap 43,
TB2, Chap 3,
TB3;
Chap 1 RB-1.

Chap 14, TB3

Chap 40-45,
TB1;
Chap 13, 16,
17, 44, 45, 58
(Biochemical
Case
Histories)
TB2

Overview of
fundamental aspects of
nutrition and its
applications in health,
medicine, food industry
and public health policy.

Understanding different
roles of microbes related
to food preservation and
Safety.

Relating the key
biochemical metabolisms
to nutrition with emphasis
on antioxidant nutrients.

 
  
   
     
   
  
  
   

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

Oxidative stress and the cell and molecular
roles of dietary antioxidants and prooxidants with implications in certain
diseases. Free radicals production, lipid
peroxidation, protein oxidation, cellular
and DNA damage will be discussed with
examples (cardiovascular disease, cancer,
diabetes). Emphasis on dietary
antioxidants - vitamins E and C,
carotenoids, polyphenols, selenium, iron,
zinc and copper in antioxidant defense
mechanisms.

Role of nutrition in the prevention
and management of several major
chronic clinical conditions and
Metabolic Syndrome:

Obesity,

Liver diseases,

Cancers,

Cardiovascular diseases (CV Ds),

Diabetes,

Renal Diseases

L#14-19:
Clinical
Nutrition

To understand how
diseases are managed
Chap 32, 39 | through dietary
TB1 interventions.

e Nutritional Management of Inborn
errors of metabolism.

Allergenic and toxic constituents in diet food supplement toxicity — food additives
LORICLUy » environmental COMEAnIT AS, Chap 14, TB3 | exposure that human
pesticides and other chemical residues - haiies encountertoueh
mutagenesis, carcinogenesis; including Fan z J
case studies / regulations "

To understand several
L# 20-23: types of chemical toxins
Nutritional

toxicology

Understanding the
molecular role of specific
nutrients in diseases, and
to kindle interest in the
growing field of
personalized nutrition.
To appreciate the
medicinal value of natural
and formulated foods.
Recapitulating the course
contents and their
immense scope in food
industry, nutrition
research/innovations and
developing community

Understanding nutrient-gene interactions,

with case studies in cancers and

cardiovascular diseases. Development of | Chap 4, TB3
nutrition databases / personalized nutrition

plans; case studies.

L# 24-26:
Nutrigenomics
and nutrition
databases

 
 
   
   
 

     
     
 
    
 

Phytochemicals, functional foods, Plant
and animal sources - Milk and Dairy
products — Prebiotics and Probiotics.

  
  

L#27-29:
Nutraceuticals

   
 

Chap 37 TB1

Pointers for R&D and industry Chap 7, 12,
applications, and public health policy. 14,15 TBS.

health framework.
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

 

6. Evaluation Scheme:

Component Duration | Weightage Date & Time Nature of component
(% ) (Close Book/ O pen Book)
id- . <TEST 1> CB/OB

<TEST C> CB/OB

Quiz & in-class assignment
may be conducted surprise
or announced. For other

Mid-Semester Test 30
5

Comprehensive 3h 3
Examination

Quiz/ Assignment/ Will be
39 components, specific CB/OB
schedule will be announced

in class for submission /

presentation.

Case-study/ Mini- announced
Project in class

7. Notices: Notices will be displayed on Nalanda / Google Classroom.

  

8. Make-up Policy: Make up may be granted only to genuine cases such as hospitalization. No make up for quiz under
any circumstances.

9. Note (if any):
(i) Regular attendance and active participation in class will be monitored and recorded. A bsenting from classes without
prior permission, lack of punctuality in reporting to class, non-submission of evaluative reports/assignments as per the

scheduled time-line, can all impact Grades during evaluation.

(ii) Mini-projects will be allotted only to the students present in the class during the project topic allotment and

discussion session. In-absentia students will not be considered for mini-project seminar/report evaluations.

Instructor-in-charge
Course No. BIO F315
