BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/AGSR Division

 

16.1.2021
Second Semester 2020-2021
Course Handout

In addition to Part! (General Handout for all courses appended to the Time Table) this portion further specific
details regarding the course.

Course No. : BIOT F416
Course Title : Introduction to Pharmaceutical Biotechnology
Instructor-in-charge — : Vishal Saxena

1. Course Description:
The course is designed to provide advances in drug development, drug delivery systems and

pharmaceutical specialties including polypeptides, proteins, viruses, DNA and antibiotics. It covers relevant
aspects for the development of new bi technology based drugs, target identification, downstream
processing and formulation. Special emphasis is given on understanding the mechanisms and process
involved in diseases.

IN

Scope and Objective of the Course:
This course is designed to impart knowledge of pharmaceutical biotechnology. It is organized to make the

Students understand various concepts and applications of biotechnology in pharmaceuticals. It helps
analyze current and newly emerging areas for research and development of biopharmaceuticals and their
applications.

Course Material:

Text book [TB] : Pharmaceutical Biotechnology: Concepts and Applications, Gary Walsh. Publishers:
J ohn Wiley & Sons, 2007.

Reference book(s) [RB]: Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, second edition. Crommelin J .A., Sindelar R.D.
Routledge-Taylor & Francis London, New York, 2003

|

Course Plan / Schedule:

4.
Learning objectives Topics to be covered Learning Outcomes
Book *
-2 | Pharmaceutical Introduction, pharmaceuticals, Chap#1 Introduction to the
biotechnology biopharmaceuticals, biologics, course
developments

1

3-8 | Recombinant DNA Genomics, Recombinant protein Chap#3 Understanding on
technology in production technology, gene use of rDNA
biopharmaceuticals manipulations, heterologous protein technology to study

   

 

expression for pharmaceutical proteins
applications, protein engineering

9-11 | Proteins targets and Protein Structures, Principles and modes Chap# 2 Understanding of
cellular modifications of protein target selection, post protein selection & its
translational modifications, Protein analysis translation process

techniques

12-16 | Biopharmaceutical Discovery of biopharmaceuticals, impact of | Chap#4 Understanding on
development process, | proteomics, genomics, drug delivery, biopharmaceuticals
pharmacokinetics and | protein pharmacokinetics and and their applications

pharmacodynamics pharmacodynamics

17-20 | Cytokines, interferons, | Interferon use and productions, Interleukin | Chap#8, | Knowledge on in-situ
interleukins, tumor production, safety issues, tumor necrosis cytokine production

necrosis factor factor and therapeutic effects techniques

ge. Save Trees.

> “4Save the World. anya Pree

Please Do Not Print Unless Necessary
SLUT

°
<8
iS x.

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/AGSR Division

Sg
ey
ao

 

1-25 | Growth factors, Hematopoietic growth factors, Chap# Knowledge on
hematopoietic growth erythropoietin, insulin like growth factors, 0 various growth
factors, wound healing | epidermal, platelet derived, fibroblast, factors and their

transforming growth factors, and biological applications
1

2
effects
2

1
6-29 | hormones, diabetes Therapeutic hormones, Insulin, production, Chap# Knowledge on
mellitus, glucagon, formulations, recombinant insulin, insulin 1 various hormones etc
human growth administration, glucagon, applications, and their applications
hormones human growth hormone, receptors,
1

therapeutics effects, applications

products, enzymes agents 2 biological products,
34-37 | Antibodies and Vaccine technology, peptide vaccines, Chap# their in-situ
vaccines production, recombinant vaccines, cancer 13 productions and
” vaccines 7” application as
biopharmaceuticals
38-41 | Nucleic acid and cell Gene therapy, AIDS, gene based vaccines Chap# Knowledge on
based therapeutics 14 Nucleic acid
therapeutics

Total number of classes planned: 41 Pe

*= Reference material will be provided as and when required.

 

0. Evaluation scheme:

EC Components Weightage Date & Time
No. % Venue
; ; , Closed Book/
, oa Closed Book/
6. Chamber Consultation Hours: To be announced in the class.
7. Notice: Notices for tests will be displayed on Biological Sciences Notice Board. Quizzes will be
unannounced.

8. Makeup Policy: Makeups for quizzes, seminar or assignment will not be granted. Make-ups for Tests
will be granted only in case of severe medical urgency or hospitalization.

 
 
   

 

 
 
 

      

Instructor-in-Charge
BIOT F416

ge. Save Trees.
£

 

*-ASave the World. nner Petey
Please Do Not Print Unless Necessary
