BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

SECOND SEMESTER 2020-21
COURSE HANDOUT

 

Date: 16.01.2021

In addition to part I (General Handout for all courses appended to the Time table) this portion gives further
specific details regarding the course.

Course No : BITS F311
Course Title : Image Processing
Instructor-in-C harge : Raj Kumar Gupta
Instructor(s) : NA

Tutorial/Practical Instructors: NA

1. Course Description: This is a first course on digital image processing. It begins with an introduction to
the fundamentals of digital images and discusses the various discrete transforms, which are extensively used
in the field of image processing. The course discusses different image processing techniques essential for
image enhancement, image restoration and image compression. Finally, it briefly touches upon automatic
image classification and recognition.

2. Scope and Objective of the Course: The course introduces the students to the fundamentals of digital
images and various processing techniques that are applied to them so as to improve their quality. These
techniques are essential for image enhancement, image restoration and image compression. It also briefly
introduces automatic image classification and recognition. Matlab software will be introduced to the students
so as to improve their skills in writing codes related to image/data processing.

3. Text Books: Gonzalez, R. C. & R. E. Woods, Digital Image Processing, Pearson.

4. Reference Books: Foundations of Coding, Jiri Adamek, Wiley, 1991

5. Course Plan:

Introduction and digital image Chapter 2 To introduce fundamental concepts
fundamentals. and terms associated with digital
images.

4 Image enhancement Chapter 3 To introduce the concept of image
enhancement

Some basic gray level transformations | Chapter 3 To study image enhancement by gray
level transformations
Histogram processing Chapter 3 To study Histogram processing of an
image
9-10 Spatial filtering Chapter 3 To learn image enhancement by
filtering in the spatial domain
11-13 Fourier Transform, Discrete Fourier | Chapter 4 To introduce Fourier Transform and
Transform and their properties. Discrete Fourier Transform

 
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

14-15 Convolution & Correlation theorems, | Chapter 4 To introduce convolution and establish
auto-correlation connection with Fourier transform
16-17 Fast Fourier Transform Chapter 4 To study the Fast Fourier Transform
algorithm

Filtering in the frequency domain Chapter 4 To learn image enhancement by
filtering in the frequency domain

 

Image degradation model, Chapter 5 To introduce image degradation and
degradation model

21-22 Removal of blur caused by uniform Chapter 5 To learn how to remove blur caused by
linear motion uniform linear motion

23 | Inverse Inverse filtering Chapters 5 To learn inverse |Toleam inverse filtering

_ 29 bene of image compression a 8 To es the fundamentals of
image compression

26 — 27 Kraft’s inequality, Huffman codes Chaps 1&2 | To introduce basics of coding theory
of ref. book 2

Entropy and data compression 8.3.4, Chap 3 | To introduce the basics of Information
of ref. Book
2

near optimal variable length codes, Chapter 8 To learn various error- free
Arithmetic and LZW coding, run- compression techniques
length coding etc.

Lossy compression, Image Chapter 8 To learn various lossy compression
compression standards techniques and learn some image
compression standards

37 — 38 Image segmentation Chapter 10 To learn some image segmentation
techniques
39 — 40 Image representation and Chapter 11 & | To introduce the idea of image
classification 12 classification and pattem recognition

 
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

 

6. Evaluation Scheme:

Component Duration | Weightage Date & Time Nature of component
(% ) (Close Book/ Open
Book)

Mid-Semester T est <TEST 1> Closed/open
Comprehensive Examination <TEST C> Closed/open

Quiz/Assignment/Coding/etc| =| ~— 35 ~—s | Anmouncedinclass_| Closed/open

7. Chamber Consultation Hour: To be announce in the class
8. Notices: Nalanda website, google classroom

9, Make-up Policy: As per Institute rule

10. Note (if any):

Instructor-in-charge
Course No. BITS F311
