BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

 

 

FIRST/SECOND SEMESTER
COURSE HANDOUT

In addition to part I (General Handout for all courses appended to the Time table) this portion gives further
specific details regarding the course.

Course No : BITS G513

Course Title : STUDY INADVANCED TOPICS
Instructor-in-C harge : Associate Dean, AGSRD
Instructor(s) : Supervisor(s)/M entor(s)

1. Course Description: In this course students will be assigned study work in advanced areas of professional
interest. Each student will work under the overall supervision and guidance of a faculty member and will in
the end submit a project report encompassing critical review of the material studied.

The organization and evaluation of the course would be achieved through seminars, group discussions, project
report etc. The course will be conducted by the team of teachers who provide guidance for study work.

2. Scope and Objective of the Course: The course aims at covering topics in advanced areas of professional
interest and will be conducted on self-study and seminar basis. The course is specially designed to provide an
opportunity to the students for development of their academic skills and logical thinking through open ended
advanced study oriented activities. As a part of education, this course follows a method of learning and,
therefore, the student's actual day-to-day task involvement would constitute the central thread of the learning
process. The evaluation will recognize this aspect by demanding day-to-day productivity, punctuality and final
achievement of the student.

3. Operation of the course:

The plan of work for each student will be decided by the respective Instructors/supervisors. Each student
should adhere to the plan of work decided for and should regularly monitor the progress of the course
accordingly. The final report encompassing critical review of the material studied will be submitted to the
Instructor-in-charge through Departmental Committee on Academics (DCA) by the end of the class work.

4, Evaluation:

Components Weightage(% ) Date/Time/V enue
Seminar | 20 To be announced * conducted by Instructor
0

seminar II 2
seminar III 25 To be announced by he DCA in consultation Final
Project Report 39 with respective Instructor

 

One copy of the final report (encompassing critical review of the material studied) to be submitted to the
Instructor-in-Charge through DCA by the end of the class work/beginning of the Comprehensive Examination.

9. Grading Procedure: In addition to what is mentioned in Part I of handout, the grading will be done mainly
on the basis of the progress made towards attainment of the course objectives. DCA and respective each
instructor will recognize that student participate in a cognitive manner for given specific task situation. A
group of instructors, decided by DCA will evaluate the final seminar and report submitted by the student(s).
Thus, each Instructor with consultation with DCA will recommend a grade for his student for the consideration
of the Instructor-in-charge. In a specialized course of this nature the respective Instructor's assessment of the
student vis-a-vis the objective of the course would be the central criterion for arriving at final grade.

Instructor-in-charge
BITS G513
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

 

 

FIRST/SECOND SEMESTER
(Outline of the course: To be filled in consultation with the proposed supervisor*)

Course No.: BITS Go13 Course Title: Study in Advanced Topics
Name of the Instructor/Supervisor:
Name of the student: ID No:_

Topic of the course work:

Aim and Scope of the Study:

Plan of Work:

Book(s)/J ournals identified for the Study:

Chamber Consultation day and hour of the Supervisor:

Notices: All notices concerning the course will be displayed on Notice Board.
Student’s Signature A pproved/Disapproved
Date: Signature of the instructor

*The registered student must submit duly filled above outline after verification from his/her
supervisor to the DCA Convener latest by 15 Aug/ 15 Jan.

2
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

 

 

BITS G513: STUDY INADVANCED TOPICS
MID-SEMESTER GRADING
Date:

INSTRUCTOR:

ID. No./Name Evaluation Components

Seminar! | Seminar II Suggested
20 20 Mid- semester grade
(Letter Grade)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Please complete the above evaluations and submit the grades to DCA Convener.

(Signature of the Instructor)

BITS G513: STUDY INADVANCED TOPICS

END-SEMESTER GRADING
Date:

INSTRUCTOR:

ID. No/Name sid Evaluation Components

ae eT Seminar IIT | Final Project |} TOTAL Suggested
(20) (20) (25) Report (35) (100) Final grade
(Letter
Grade)

 

03.

 

 

04.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Please complete the above evaluations and submit the grades to DCA Convener.

(Signature of the Instructor) (Signature of the DCA Convener)

 
