BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus

 

INSTRUCTION DIVISION
Second Semester 2020-21
C ourse Handout
Date: 17/01/2021

1. Course No: BITS F482/C 482/MBA C482

2. Course Name: Creating and Leading Entrepreneurial Organization
3. Instructor(s)-in-charge: ARYA KUMAR

4. Course Objective(s):

This Course is about creating, managing, and leading an organization. This course helps in creating
an entrepreneurial mindset, developing entrepreneurial skills and equipping students with the basic
knowledge necessary for an entrepreneur.

Objectives:
The objectives of the course are:

e To understanding about entrepreneurship and getting inspiration from successful
entrepreneurs.

e To learn about idea generation, opportunity assessment and evaluation and the process to
create, build, and lead an entrepreneurial organization.

e To learn about nitty gritty of preparation of Business Plan.

e To know about different sources of funding and identify an appropriate source of funding
for the venture.

e To leam about launching a business venture and growing it to next level of growth.

Deliverables

The course shall enable the participants to acquire and equip themselves with requisite knowledge
and skills to start and run a business successfully, which is divided into personal skills
(entrepreneurial skills) and those to start a company (Start-up tools).

5. Course C ontent:

Fundamentals of Entrepreneurship; Elements of Leadership; Identifying Business Opportunities;
Market Study and Research; Business Plans; Finance, Issues in Raising Finance, Venture
Capitalist Evaluation of Business Plans, Technical Aspects for the Project; Corporate Strategies

; Save Paper.
| ae, Salle Trees.
pa noes == Please Consider Your Environmental £> =" -4Save the Werld.

Responsibilities
Do Not Print Unless Necessary
 

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus

for Growth; Legal Aspects to entrepreneurship; People Skills; Marketing and Branding; Creativity
and Communication.

6. Text Book:

Entrepreneurship - Creating and Leading an Entrepreneurial Organisation, Arya Kumar,
Pearson 2012

Reference Books:

Entrepreneurship; Robert D Hisrich , Michael P Peters, and Dean A Shepherd, Tata
McGraw Hill Publishing Company, New Delhi, 6" ed., 2006.

Patterns of Entrepreneurship, Jack M Kaplan, John Wiley & Sons, 2006.
Entrepreneurship New Venture Creation, David H Holt, Prentice Hall of India, New
Delhi, 2004.

The Handbook of Business enterprise, Kogan Page India Pvt. Ltd. 2003.

The Guru Guide o Entrepreneurship, Joseph H Boyett and Jimmie T Boyett, John Wiley
& Sons, 2001.

Entrepreneurship Theory, Process, Practice, Donald F Kuratko and Richard M
Hodgetts, Thomson Learning, 2007.

7. Course Plan:
The course is broken into 10 broad TASKS as under:

No of Text

Sessions Book Chapter

TASK 1: To understand and appreciate the importance of 3 Chap 1-2

Entrepreneurship.

The roller coaster ride of entrepreneurship,
Fundamentals of Entrepreneurship, Entrepreneurship vs
Intrapreneurship, Risks, Challenges, Uncertainty

TASK 2: Entrepreneurial Leadership. 3 Chap3

Leader vs Manager, Principled Centered Leadership, Entrepreneurial
Leadership, Case studies on some of the most successful business
Leaders. To diagnose self in relation to business leaders and prepare
Oneself with requisite skills, especially to identify and prepare a plan
of action to overcome some of the critical weaknesses.

p Save Papet.
| ee, Save Trees.
pa noes == Please Consider Your Environmental £> =" -4Save the Werld.

Responsibilities
Do Not Print Unless Necessary
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus

TASK 3: Assess Business Potential of an Idea. 6& 7

Creativity, innovation and entrepreneurship, Sources of new ideas,
Techniques for generating new ideas, Opportunity recognition and
Assessment.

Legal aspects of a business — Forms of business entities and related
Implications, winding up of accompany, Need for a lawyer.
Intellectual Property Rights and Implications for Entrepreneur.

TASK 4: Develop the Business idea into a Business Plan — 3 Chap 8, 9,

Business plan — what, when and for whom?, Business plan drivers, 10
Pitching BP, Why plan fails? V arious facets of BP - market,

management team, financial requirements, risks involved, and exit

Strategy.

Marketing Plan- Need and importance of marketing research, tools
and techniques for undertaking market research

Operation and Production Plan — Product design & analysis, New
product development, Product specifications and customer needs,
Production, planning and control

TASK 5: Incorporate your Revenue model into your Business 3 Chap 12

Basic financial modeling, Basic elements of finance , Understanding
cash flow projection and budgeting, Balance sheets and income tax,
Break-even analysis, ratio analysis
4 Chap 13
TASK 6: To learn the art of raising finance
Raising Finance, Assessing financial requirements, Issues in raising
finance, Understanding the financers.
Sources of finance - seed funding, angel funding, venture capitalist
funding, raising money from banks, lease financing and financial
institutions etc.
TASK 7: Art and science of Managing People 4 Chap 11
Venture team development, Building winning team, People
management — key to success, organizational structure and systems,
Designing an effective organizational structure.

F Save Paper.
dee, Save Trees.
, Pe ets oo Please Consider Your Environmental £2 4Save the Werld.

Responsibilities
Do Not Print Unless Necessary

 
> BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus

 

Chap
TASK 8: Developing Business Strategy - Launching and 4 14,15
Growth of Business
New Venture launch and Managing Early Growth, Steps involved in
launching a business, Raising different resources, motivating and
inspiring a team, Understanding technology trends, managing cash,
Record keeping and due diligence, Implementation plan.
Managing Growth - Venture development stages, Why entrepreneurs
do not scale up?

TASK 9: Start up to Going Public 4 Chap 16

What is an IPO? When to go for IPO? Steps involved in issuing an IPO,
Marketing strategies for IPO.

TASK 10: Revival, Exit and End of a venture 2 Chap 17

Managing Change, Key strategies to turn around, liquidation, exit strategy for
entrepreneur

8. Methodology of Teaching:

The approach used in this course focuses on learning by doing and learning by interactions. The

effort of the instructor in this course is to be on the following:

e Enable participants to understand the importance and relevance of entrepreneurship in the

present era.
e Motivating and inspiring them to take up entrepreneurship as a career option.

e Enable them to understand the traits of an entrepreneur with a view to diagnose their own

personality as to their strengths and weaknesses V is-a- Vis ideal profile and to enable them
to work out strategies to consciously inculcate desired skills.

Enabling participants to identify ideas, judge their potential as an entrepreneurial
opportunity, select a particular opportunity within a well-defined criteria, developing it
further to concretize it to give it a shape of a business, with a focus on implementation
Strategies.

Develop skills to pitch their ideas for meeting their goals to raise finance.

Inculcate communication and negotiation abilities to manage situations and people.
Above all, to create an entrepreneurial environment that encourages participants to have
zeal to learn by interaction and asking questions.

p Save Papet.
| ee, Save Trees.
pa noes == Please Consider Your Environmental £> =" -4Save the Werld.

Responsibilities
Do Not Print Unless Necessary
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus

 

9. Special Lectures:

A series of online talks on entrepreneurial topics by leading entrepreneurs spread all over the globe
(mostly BITSians having achieved great heights) would be arranged under Embryo project. These
lectures would be well planned and carry substantive weight age. A series of interactive sessions
by entrepreneurs and professionals shall also be arranged from time to time for the benefit of
students which would be part and parcel of course curriculum.

10. Evaluation C omponents

The evaluation components will have a basic focus on the following:

Business Conceptualization to execution (Core), Evaluation on modules of specialization
(Finance, Project Preparation etc.), In-house learning sessions , Group discussions , Experiential
Learning , Assignments and project work , Case studies, Simulation Games/Role Play , Seminars
(students will be required to articulate and share their learning from their practical experience) ,

Evaluation Scheme

Component Duration Weight age % Date & Time
i) Mid Term Exam 90 Min 30% each
li) Surprise Quizzes 10%
Business Plan Preparation/ Presentation
15%
Exercises//Reading 15%
Assignment/A ssignments etc.
v) Comprehensive Exam 20 min. 30%

11. Chamber Consultation Hours: To be announced in the class.

12. Notices: To be announced in the class.

13. Make up Exam: Make-up exam will be given to only genuine cases that to with prior
permission.

Instructor In-C harge
BITS F482

; : Save Papert.
| ax, Save Trees.
my Please Consider Your Environmental >? 4S ave the Werld

Responsibilities
Do Not Print Unless Necessary
