BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

SECOND SEMESTER 2020-2021
COURSE HANDOUT

 

Date: 10.03.2021

In addition to part | (General Handout for all courses appended to the Time table) this portion gives further specific
details regarding the course.

Course No : BITS F112

Course Title : Technical Report Writing

Instructor-in-Charge : PUSHP LATA

Instructor(s) : Kumar Sankar Bhattacharya, Muhammed Afzal P, Chintalapalli Vijayakumar, Paul

Mathew, and Prateek

1. Course Description

Overview of communication; elements of effective writing; formal reports, types of reports, and preparatory steps
for writing reports; methods and sources of data collection, data analysis and interpretation; and use of illustrations
and report writing, and oral presentation

2. Scope and Objective of the Course
Technical reports are vital for engineering and science graduates to communicate their ideas. This course introduces

technical report writing and teaches the techniques they need to construct well-written technical reports.

The objective of the course is to help the learners understand the process of communication, develop skills in writing
technical reports and present them effectively to an audience.

3. Text Books
Sharma, R.C. and K. Mohan. 2016. Business Correspondence and Report Writing. Fifth Edition. New Delhi: Tata McGraw

Hill.

4. Reference Books
(i) Raman, Meenakshi and Sangeeta Sharm. 2011. Technical Communication: Principles and Practice. Second
Edition. New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
(ii) Gerson, Sharon J and Stern M. Gerson. 2000. Technical Writing: Process and Product. 5th Edition. New Delhi:
Pearson Education Asia.

(iii) Rhonda Liss and Jason Davis. 2012. Effective Academic Writing (The Researched Essay) Second Edition. Oxford
: Oxford University Press.

5. Course Plan

Module | Lecture Session Reference | Learning outcomes

Communication: Textbook | Understanding the importance, process and types of
Definition and Ch.1 -4 communication in general, and business communication in

Process specific; Identifying communication barriers, overcoming them

and applying appropriate communication strategies across
settings, purposes, and audiences

 
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

3 Elements of Effective ~T Developing skills for skills for choosing and using appropriate words and
Writing- Choice of phrases in sentence construction; Identifying and eliminating
Words and Phrases clichés, circumlocution, redundancy and ambiguity from their
Effective Writing- writing to make cohesive, comprehensible and complete
Sentence Construction paragraphs for creating meaningful text
and Length
“ “
| 6 Technical Reports Ch. 17 Understanding the importance of technical reports for
7-8 Types of Reports Ch. 17 professionals and knowing different formats of reports and their
significance
9-11 Preparatory Steps Ch.19 Understanding and applying the preparatory steps for writing
effective reports
12-13 | Sources of Data Ch. 19 Understanding primary and secondary methods of data collection
14-15 | Methods of Data Ch. 19 and implementing the nuances involved in designing
questionnaires
Collection a

16-17 Mail Questionnaire Ch. 19

18-19 | Report Structure Ch. 18 Understanding structural elements of a technical report

20-22 | Data Analysis & Use of | Ch. 21 Analyzing and interpreting data and using appropriate illustrations
Illustrations

23-25 | Report writing Ch.23 and | Constructing complete technical reports

26-27 | Memo Report & Letter | Ch. 24, 26; | Understanding the utility and structural elements of shorter
Report Ref. (i): reports like memo and letter reports
Ch.18

28-29 | Oral Presentation of Ch. 6 Understanding and applying the strategies/methods for effective
Reports oral presentation of reports

6. Evaluation Scheme:
Component Duration Weightage Date & Time Nature of component
ae 2 (Close Book/ Open Book)

Mid Sem Test Will be announced by CB
AUGSD
Assignments Take Home = Will be announced in the OB

 

15-page class

 

report
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

Comprehensive 2 Hrs. 30/06 AN OB
Examination

7. Chamber Consultation Hour: To be announced in the class by the concerned instructor

 

8. Notices: Notices concerning the course will be displayed on Nalanda

9. Make-up Policy: Makeup will be granted only when prior permission is taken from the instructor. A written request
is to be made to the IC through the individual instructor.

10. Note: Self Learning: Textbook Chs.1 & 4 Ref. (iii). Chs.3, 5, 11, 12, 13

Instructor-in-charge
Course No. BITS F112

*Business Correspondence & Report Writing
Sharma, R. C. and Krishna Mohan
TMH, 5th ed., 2017

http://www.expresslibrary.mheducation.com/pdfreader/business-correspondence-report-writing
Username: BITS _EL_eBooks

Password: Mcgraw2020
