BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

 

 

SECOND SEMESTER 2020-21 COURSE HANDOUT
Date: 15.01.2021

In addition to part I (General Handout for all courses appended to the Timetable) this portion gives further
specific details regarding the course.

Course No : CE F342

Course Title : Water and Wastewater Treatment
Instructor-in-C harge : Anupam Singhal

Instructor(s) : Anupam Singhal

Tutorial/Practical Instructors: R. Srinivas, Soumya Kar, Srishti Khare and Akshay Kumar

1. Course Description: In this course, the fundamental concepts involved in W ater and Wastewater treatment will be
discussed. The course coverage includes a wide range of topics such as sources of water, estimation of water
requirements and wastewater generation, study of their characteristics, natural methods of purification, different unit
operations for treatment of water and wastewater, sludge handling and disposal, advanced wastewater treatment, reuse
of wastewater, and hydraulic design of sewer and water supply distribution system. The course has a lab component
where the student gets involved in the testing of few physico-chemical parameters of water and wastewater.

2. Scope and Objective of the Course: The need of the hour in the world nowadays is “provision of adequate and
potable water supply”. The world is witnessing a war like situation for ‘lack of water supply’ at many places. The global
need is for judicious use of available water and putting efforts to recycle/reuse the treated wastewater for beneficial
purposes. This course aims to provide insight to the several technical aspects to be considered in the planning, design,
and implementation of water supply and wastewater treatment schemes. Field application of the subject is illustrated
through case studies reported in literature. In addition, students will be shown some videos to illustrate the field
application of the experiments demonstrated in the laboratory sessions.

3. Textbooks:
T1. Punmia B.C, A. Jain and A. Jain. Water Supply Engineering, Laxmi Publications, New Delhi, 1995.

T2. Punmia B.C, A. Jain and A. Jain. Wastewater Engineering, Laxmi Publications, New Delhi, 1998.
T3. Moondra H.S. and R. Gupta, Laboratory manual for Civil Engineering, CBS Publishers & Distributors,
Delhi, 1992.

Reference Books:
R1. Peavy H.S., D. R. Rowe and G. Tchobanoglous. Environmental Engineering, McGraw Hill Education (India)

Private Limited, 2013.

R2. Garg S.K. ,Water Supply Engineering, Khanna Publishers, Delhi, 2008.

R3. Garg S.K., Sewage Disposal & Air Pollution Engineering, Khanna Publishers, Delhi, 2010.
R4, Relevant IS codes, National and International Journals pertaining to the subject.

5. Course Plan:

Module No. Lecture Session Reference | Learning outcomes

1. Introduction to Introduction; Estimationof WS & | Ch.l of T1& Understanding the basic
basics of Water WW; Characteristics (1-5) T2; Ch. 5 of T1; | concepts of water and
Supply (WS) and wastewater characteristics

 
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

wastewater (WW) ~~ Ch 6ofTi ch] 6 of T1; Ch.
Engineering 8 of T2

2. Natural methods Self-purification of rivers, Ch. 7 of T1; Idea about the selffor water and Dilution method, Gas transfer(6-8) | Ch.9 of T2 purification capacity of
wastewater streams and natural
treatment methods of treatment

 

3. Unit operations for | Preliminary treatment, Ch 8-11 of T1 Different steps in water
water treatment Sedimentation, Filtration, treatment
Disinfection(9-19)

4, Unit operations for | Preliminary treatment, Primary Ch. 10-15 of T2 | Students will get idea
wastewater treatment, Secondary treatment about the different
treatment methodologies of

(20-34) wastewater treatment

9. Treatment and Dewatering, Digestion and Ch. 16 of T2 Remedies of solid waste
disposal of sludge | disposal(35-37) disposal

Advanced methods | Ion exchange, Reverse Osmosis, Ch-18 of T2; Idea about the latest
of treatment for Adsorption, Water softening, Ch. 11 ,12,130f | techniques of water and
water and WW Desalination (38-40) T1 wastewater treatment

Application of Hydraulic design of sewers, WS Ch. 4 of T2; Ch. | Understanding the design
Hydraulics and distribution networks and Field 16 of T1 of sewers and water
Case studies case studies (41-44) distribution system

 

6. List of Experiments
Determination of acidity and alkalinity in water. 1 Tum

Determination of Dissolved Oxygen (DO) in water 1 Turn
3 Determination of iron and residual chlorine in water 1 Tum
5 Determination of Hardness content in water 1 Tum

Determination of Calcium content in water 1 Tum

7 Determination of pH, turbidity and suspended solids of water 1 Tum

Oe
CT ——  eF
2

 
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

1 Tum

Water quality monitoring and real time monitoring of river Ganges using remote sensing.

Usage of multiparameter sonde to measure water quality parameters and treatment of storm | 1 Tum
water runoff in urban setting.

7. Evaluation Scheme:

(% ) (Close Book/ Open Book)
|Mid-SemesterTest_ | 90Min. | 30 0 | TEST: 1> | OB
:

Examination

 

Lab activity/ Quiz

Assignments 3% To be announced in the
class from time to
time(OB)

8. Chamber Consultation Hour: 4 to 5 PM every Monday.

 

9, Notices: Concerning the course will be declared in the class or updated in Google classroom.
10. Make-up Policy:

a. Make-up will be granted only on genuine reasons. However, prior permission is must.
b. For medical cases, a certificate from the concerned physician of the Medical Centre must be produced.
c. NO make-up will be granted for lab quiz.

11. Note (if any): Academic honesty and academic integrity are to be maintained by all the students throughout the
semester and no type of academic dishonesty is acceptable.

Instructor-in-charge
Course No. CE F342
