BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

SECOND SEMESTER 2020-21
COURSE HANDOUT

 

Date: 18.01.2021

In addition to part I (General Handout for all courses appended to the Time table) this portion gives further
specific details regarding the course.

Course No : CE F432

Course Title : STRUCTURAL DYNAMICS
Instructor-in-C harge : DIPENDU BHUNIA
Instructor(s) : N/A

Tutorial/Practical Instructors: N/A
1. Course Description:

Introduction and Scope of dynamic analysis of structures; origins of vibration theory and experiment; review of earlier
concepts: d’Alembert’s principle, equations of motion. Elements of a structural system: springs, dashpot, mass; Springs
in parallel and series; methods to formulate equations of motion; Formulation (equation of motion) and solution of
undamped and damped free vibration analysis of $.D.O.F system; Formulation (equation of motion) and solution of
undamped and damped forced vibration analysis of S.D.O.F system; Forced vibration under harmonic, periodic,
impulse, step, ramp, general dynamic forces (time and frequency domain analysis) and response spectrum load, support
excited vibration, seismic pickups; Numerical techniques for evaluation of dynamic response of SDOF system; time
domain analysis; direct integration techniques; finite difference method (Central Difference method); Newmark beta
method; average and linear acceleration method; Development of equation of motion and solution for two degree of
freedom systems; Free vibration analysis of MDOF systems; frequencies; mode shapes and response; orthogonality
condition of mode shapes; Approximate methods for obtaining natural frequencies and mode shapes; Holzer method;
Stodola’s method; Rayleigh’s method; Rayleigh-Ritz method; Inverse iteration method; Vector iteration method;
Rayleigh’s Quotient iteration method; Matrix iteration method; Generation of damping matrix for MDOF; dynamic
properties; modal damping; classical damping; damped response with Rayleigh and Caughey damping.Mode
superposition method; mode acceleration method; modal combination rules using absolute sum, SRSS and CQC method.
Response Spectrum, continuous system.

2. Scope and Objective of the C ourse:

The course aims how to model discrete single-degree and multiple-degree vibratory systems and calculate the
free and forced response of these systems. It also describes about the calculation of the mode shapes and
frequencies for the free response and using modal methods how to calculate the forced response of these
systems. This course explains about modeling of continuous vibratory systems. At the last, this course
discusses application in the design of civil engineering structures.

Therefore, this course is necessary for students how to apply the methods leamed to a realistic engineering
vibration problem related to civil engineering.

3. Text Books:

TB. Mukhopadhyay,M. (2006) “Structural Dynamics: Vibrations & Systems” Ane Books Pvt. Ltd.
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

 

4, Reference Books:

R1. Chopra, A.K. (2007) “Dynamics of Structures: Theory and Application to Earthquake Engineering”
Pearson Education, 3" edition.

R2. Agarwal, P. and Shrikhande, M. (2006), “Earthquake Resistant Design of Structures” Prentice-Hall of
India.

R3. Clough, R. W. and Penzien, J. (1972), “Dynamics of Structures,” McGraw Hill Publication Ltd., USA.

5. Course Plan:

Module Number | Lecture session/Practice Session. Learning Outcome

1. Importance of | L1. Introduction and Scope of T1,R1,R3 | Understand the
the course. dynamic analysis of structures; origins Importance of the course
of vibration theory and experiment;
review of earlier concepts:
d’Alembert’s principle, equations of
motion.
2. Fundamentals L2.1. Elements of a structural system: T1,R1,R3 | Understand about the
of Dynamics of Springs, dashpot, mass; Springs in Fundamentals of

Structures parallel and series; D egg OS of Structures.

rT L2.2. methods to formulate equations T1, R1, TE RERS
of motion

3. Freevibration | L3. Formulation (equation of motion) a R1, R3 ———— Free
analysis of and solution of undamped and damped vibration analysis of
S.D.O.F system. free vibration analysis of $.D.O.F 5.D.O.F system.
system.
ee
Assignments
4, Forced L4. Formulation (equation of motion) T1, R1, R3 Understanding the
vibration analysis | and solution of undamped and damped Forced vibration

of S.D.O.F system | forced vibration analysis of $.D.0.F analysis of $.D.O.F
system. system.

PA, Practice problems. Class notes &
Assignments

5. Forced L5.1. Forced vibration under T1,R1,R3 | Acquiring knowledge
vibration analysis | harmonic, periodic, impulse, step, about the evaluation of
(evaluation of ramp, general dynamic forces (time response to general
response to and frequency domain analysis). dynamic loading
general dynamic

loading).

L5.2. response spectrum load, support | T1, R1, R3 Bn
excited vibration, seismic pickups.

 
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

ee
Assignments

6. Numerical L6. Numerical techniques for T1,R1,R3 | Acquiring knowledge
about the Numerical
methods for free and

forced vibration

methods forfree | evaluation of dynamic response of

and forced SDOF system; time domain analysis;

vibration analysis | direct integration techniques; finite

(evaluation of difference method (Central Difference

dynamic method); Newmark beta method;

response). average and linear acceleration
method.

Assignments
7. Analysis of two | L7.1. Development of equation of T1,R1,R3 | Understanding the
degree of freedom. | motion. Analysis of two degree
of freedom.
a ee
freedom systems.
Assignments

8. Free vibration | L 8. Free vibration analysis of MDOF T1,R1,R3 | Free vibration (Eigen
(Eigen value) systems; frequencies; mode shapes value) analysis of
analysis of lumped | and response; orthogonality condition lumped MDOF systems.

analysis.

  

  

MDOF systems. of mode shapes.

P8. Practice problems. Class notes & Be
Assignments

9, Method of L9.1 Approximate methods for T1,R1,R3 | Method of solving Eigen
solving Eigen obtaining natural frequencies and value problems.
value problems. mode shapes; Holzer method;

Stodola’s method; Rayleigh’s method;

Rayleigh-Ritz method.

L9.2 Inverse iteration method; V ector T1, R1, R3
iteration method; Rayleigh’s Quotient

iteration method; Matrix iteration

method.

a
Assignments

10. Forced L10. Generation of damping matrix T1, R1, R2, R3 | Understanding of
vibration analysis | for MDOF; dynamic properties; modal Forced vibration
of MDOF damping; classical damping; damped analysis of MDOF
systems. response with Rayleigh and Caughey systems.

damping.Mode superposition method;

   

  

mode acceleration method; modal
combination rules using absolute sum,
SRSS and CQC method. Response
Spectrum, continuous system.

 

P 10. Practice problems. Class notes &
Assignments
3
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

 

6. Evaluation Scheme:

(% ) (Close Book/ O pen Book)
OB
ea |e > Te
Examination
Assignments —[ Continuous} 10, | Cs
oes me

7. Chamber Consultation Hour: To be announced in the class
8. Notices: Notices will be displayed through NALANDA ONLY.

9. Make-up Policy: If the student is unable to appear for the Regular Test/Examination due to genuine
exigencies, the student must refer to the procedure for applying for Make-up Test/Examination. No make up
for the assignments/projects seminar.

10. Note (if any): It shall be the responsibility of the individual student to be regular in maintaining the self
study schedule as given in the course handout, attend lectures and in time assignments submission as per the
schedule announced in Nalanda/lecture class. Mid Semester Test and Comprehensive Examination are
according to the Evaluation Scheme given in the respective Course Handout.

(DIPENDU BHUNIA)
Instructor In charge
CE F432
