BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

SECOND SEMESTER 2020-21
COURSE HANDOUT

 

Date: 18.01.2021

In addition to part I (General Handout for all courses appended to the Time table) this portion gives further
specific details regarding the course.

Course No : CE F423

Course Title : Green Buildings and Energy Conservation
Instructor-in-C harge : Rajiv Gupta

Instructor(s) :

Tutorial/Practical Instructors:

1. Course Description: Climate zones and sun path diagram, thermal comfort, heat flow through building
materials, energy efficient building design factors like site planning, plan form and orientation,
construction techniques, materials and finishes, natural day lighting and ventilation strategies, thermal
performance of building elements, simple techniques to recycle and reuse water, harvest rainwater,
green building rating system, case studies of traditional architecture and contemporary buildings,
building design using AUTOCAD

2. Scope and Objective of the Course: The course introduces green architecture and intends to equip
students with technical knowledge of energy-efficient green building. The course covers various
aspects of green architecture like climatology, passive solar architecture, water management. The
course will also guide students, through projects, to apply concepts and ideas for the design of a green
building.

3. Lext Books:

T1. Krishnan A., Baker N., Yannas S. and Szokolay S. (Ed.). Climate responsive architecture, a design

handbook for energy efficient buildings. Tata McGraw-Hill Publishing Company: New Delhi. 2001

T2. The Energy and Resources Institute and ICAEN (Institut Catala d’Energia). Sustainable building
design manual (Volume 2). The Energy and Resources Institute: New Delhi. 2004.

4, Reference Books:
R1. Olgyay V. and Olgyay A. Design with climate; bioclimatic approach to architectural regionalism.

University Press: New Jersey. 1963.

R2. Duffie J. and Beckman W. Solar engineering of thermal processes. Second edition. John Wiley &
Sons: New York. 1991.

R3. Bureau of Indian Standards. SP:41, Handbook on functional requirements of buildings (other than

industrial buildings). First reprint. Bureau of Indian Standards: New Delhi. 1995.

R4. Indian Green Building Council. LEED-India, Green building rating system, abridged reference guide
for new construction and major renovations (LEED India NC), version 1.0. Indian Green Building Council:
Hyderabad. 2007.
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

R5. The Energy and Resources Institute. TERI-Green Rating for Integrated Habitat Assessment. The
Energy and Resources Institute: New Delhi. 2006.

Journals: Energy and Buildings, Building and Environment, Elsevier Publications.

5. Course Plan:

desic architecture
6-7 Indices of thermal comfort, R1, R3 Thermal comfort and
chart
ee Vernacular buildings in different Traditional
climate zones architecture and
climate
water bodies
foundations R3 techniques
lighting
building elements conductance
27-29 Techniques to recycle, reuse and
harvest water buildings
maintenance
GRIHA stem
zones buildings
40-43 Elements of building design

6. Evaluation Scheme:

 

  

Component Duration | Weightage Date & Time Nature of component
(% ) (Close Book/ O pen Book)
Mid-SemesterTest_ | 90Min. | 25 | CB/ OB
OB/ CB

 

Comprehensive 120/ 180 39 03.05.2021
Examination MTS FN
2
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

out of 7)

 

 

Projet Cm

7. Chamber Consultation Hour: TTH: 4-5 PM
8. Notices: Nalanda only

9, Make-up Policy: Prior permission is must
RAJIV GUPTA
Instructor-in-charge
Course No.
