BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, PILANI
INSTRUCTION DIVISION
SECOND SEMESTER 2020-2021
Course Handout (Part - Il
Date: 18/01/2021

In addition to part | (General Handout for all course appended to the time table) this portion gives further
Specific details regarding the course.

Course No. : CE F241

Course Title : ANALYSIS OF STRUCTURES
Instructor-in-charge : ANSHUMAN

Instructor S N Patel

Tutorial Instructor Anshuman, S N Patel

1, COURSE DESCRIPTION:

Bending moment and Shear force Diagrams for Determinate beams and Frames and Three hinged
arches, analysis of cables; member forces and deflection in determinate trusses; determination of static
and kinematic indeterminacy of structures; work and energy principles; analysis of fixed beams,
continuous beams, indeterminate frames and indeterminate trusses; slope deflection and moment
distribution methods, Maxwell's reciprocal theorems, rolling loads and influence lines, Muller Breslau’s
principles, two hinged and fixed arches, analysis of multistory frames, introduction to stiffness and
flexibility methods.

2. Scope Description of the Course:

The Prime responsibility of a structural engineer is to ensure that structures transmit the service loads
Safely and efficiently to its foundation. In performing this primary function, in the structure internal forces
(1.e. bending moment and shear force in beams and, axial force and bending moment in columns) gets
develop along with the displacements. For the serviceability requirement of the structure the
displacements must be within limit. The objective of the structural analysis is to determine these internal
forces and corresponding displacement of the structure.

3. Text Book:
Hibbler, R. C., Structural Analysis, Sixth Edition, Pearson Education, New Delhi, 2008.
Refrence Book:
Kenneth M. Leet, Fundamentals of Structural Analysis, 2/e, Tata Mc Hill, New Delhi.

4. Course Plan:

es | Learning Objective hac. | Topics to be covered cen

Classification of structures, types of loads load
combinations, idealization of structures, principle
Basic Concepts of Structural of superposition, Equations of equilibrium,
analysis Stability, degree of static and _ kinematic
indeterminacy of beams and frames, stability of
structures, application of equations of equilibrium
Analysis of Statically Determinate Structures:
Analysis of statically Internal forces, sign convention, free body

Determinate Beams and diagram, Bending moment and Shear force
Frames diagrams for determinate beams and Frames.

Analysis of Statically Types of trusses, assumptions for design,

3. . 4 Classification of coplanar trusses, external and
Determinate Trusses ; 
internal stability of trusses, analysis of 2-D trusses

 
using method of joints and method of sections,
zero force members, analysis of compound
trusses, analysis of complex trusses

Influences line for determinate beams and
trusses, Maximum and absolute bending moment
and shear force due to series of moving loads

ae
Deflection of beams using (i) elastic beam theory,
Determination of (ii) double integration, (ill) Moment-area, (iv)
5. | Deflections and Slopes in 5 conjugate beam, (v) energy principals, principle of
a

Influence lines for Statically

Determinate Structures

Beams and Trusses virtual work, Castigliano’s theorem, determination
ca u of deflection of trusses, beams and frames using
virtual work method and Castigliano’s theorem

Characteristics of cables, analysis of cables
Subjected to concentrated loads and uniformly
distributed loads, types of arches, analysis of
three-hinged arches

Analysis of Cables and Arches

Analysis of Statically Indeterminate Structures:

Advantages & disadvantages and Methods of
analysis of statically indeterminate structures,
concept of force method, Maxwell Reciprocal
theorem and Bettis law, Analysis of beams,
Frames and trusses using force method, Analysis
of beams using three moment equations,
Influence lines for statically indeterminate beams

+
Slove Concept of displacement method, slope deflection
Analysis of Seflection P equations, analysis of beams and frames (with
Statically and without side sway) using slope deflection
Indeterminate Method method
fs Structures a

Analysis of Statically
Indeterminate Structures by
Force method

b
Displacement y Moment Concept of Moment Distribution Method, analysis
of beams and frames (with and without side sway)

method Distribution
Method using Moment Distribution method

Approximate analysis of Indeterminate Trusses,
beams and portal frames, Analysis of building
frames subjected to lateral loads using Portal and
cantilever methods

Approximate analysis of
Statically Indeterminate structures

Stiffness matrix for bar and beam elements,
Analysis of Truss, beam and Frame structures
using the Stiffness method

Introduction to Matrix Methods
of Structural Analysis

 

5. Evaluation Scheme:

Component | Duration Weightage Date & Time
W-1

Comprehensive Examination 13/05 FN 8:00 -—11:00
Hrs

6. Chamber Consultation: To be announced in the class.
7. Notices: All notices concerning to the course will be displayed on Nalanda/Google Class Room.
8. Make-up Policy: Make will be granted with prior permission to genuine cases.

 

Instructor-in-charge
CE C241
