BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

SECOND SEMESTER 2020-21
COURSE HANDOUT

 

Date: 20.01.21

In addition to part I (General Handout for all courses appended to the Time table) this portion gives further
specific details regarding the course.

Course No : CE F313

Course Title : Foundation Engineering

Instructor-in-C harge : Ravi Kant Mittal (ravimittal@ pilani.bits-pilani.ac.in) Mb.9887692025
Instructor(s) :
Tutorial/Practical Instructors: Ravi Kant Mittal

1. Course Description: General requirement for satisfactory performance of shallow foundations, general, local and punching
shear failures, bearing capacity, settlement, tilt and rotation of foundations, proportioning of Shallow Foundations, footings on
layered soils and slopes, Deep foundations, capacity of single and group Piles, laterally loaded pile, Earth Pressure theories,
Retaining structures, design and checks for stability, Stability of slopes, Introduction to Ground Improvement Techniques and
geosynthetics with applications, Introduction to machine foundations for different type of machines, Introduction to geotechnical
earthquake engineering and liquefaction of soils, computer applications in foundation design.

2. Scope and Objective of the Course: The main goal of this course is to provide an in-depth understanding regarding
different types of foundations. Complete analysis of foundations and retaining structures (Shallow foundations, pile foundations,
machine foundations, retaining walls, slope stability etc.) considering all geotechnical aspects is included. Emphasis will be given
on complete coverage of code of practices for various types of foundations and retaining structures. Geotechnical earthquake
engineering, Ground improvement techniques, reinforced earth walls, geosynthetics applications increased tremendously therefore
given due consideration.

3. Text Books: TB1. Murthy, V. N. S. (2010) “Geotechnical Engineering: Principles and Practices of Soil Mechanics and
Foundation Engineering”, CRC Press, Taylor & Francis Group, First Indian Reprint, 2010.

TB2. Das B M and Sivakugan, N. (2019) Principles of Foundation engineering, Cengage Learning, 9" edition.

4, Reference Books:

R1. Gopal Ranjan, and A. S. R. Rao, “Basic and Applied Soil Mechanics”, New Age Int. Publishers, 3rd edition, 2015
R2. Kaniraj, S.R. “Design Aids in Soil Mechanics and Foundation Engineering”, Tata McGraw Hill, 1988.

R3. Gulhati, SK, and Datta, M. “Geotechnical Engineering”, Tata McGraw-Hill Publishing Company Ltd, 2005.

R4. McCarthy (2014) Essential of Soil Mechanics and Foundations, 7“ edition, Pearson

R5. Relevant BIS, IRC codes and International code of practice

5. Course Plan:

General General principles, concepts, requirement | 3 Chapter 2, 3 T2, | Selection and design
requirement j|for _ satisfactory performance of NBC (National | requirement for shallow
for shallow | foundations, Types of foundations, Building _Code)- | foundations
foundations selection and their specific applications. 2016, IS 1904, R1,

Interpretation of geotechnical testing, R2

selecting foundation design parameters

from laboratory and field tests
Bearing Failure mechanism, generalized bearing 6, 7, T2, 12T1,|Leaming to find
capacity and | capacity equation, local and punching shear 1S6403, IS8009- | Bearing capacity of
allowable failures, corrections for size, shape, depth, parti, Shallow foundations in
bearing water table, compressibility, Effect of load different cases
pressure of eccentricity and inclination etc., Selection

of shear strength parameters, Bearing

 
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

ee 1S6403, | Learning procedures to
IS8009-partl, R1, | find allowable bearing
R2 pressure for shallow

foundation

capacity analysis of footings on onlayerd | |
foundation soils.

Different approaches for determination of
allowable soil pressure for choesionless and

   

cohesive soils from lab and field tests (SPT,
CPT, etc.).

  

Proportioning | Load combination, Proportioning of

of footings isolated footings, strip, rectangular and
trapezoidal combined footings,
proportioning of footings subjected to
combined vertical, moment and horizontal
loads

Deep Types of deep foundations and their

Foundations- | applications, selection, general

bearing requirements, driven and bored piles, pre
capacity and | cast and cast in-situ piles, under-reamed

settlement piles, pier and well foundations, Indian

case histories.

Load carrying capacity of piles by

different methods, load tests, settlement

14T1,8T2 Leaning how to
Class notes proportion shallow
foundations

   

 

15 T1, 182911 Learning Deep
Foundations
classification, selection,
and their applicability
and construction

 
 
    
 

15 TB, 182911 Learmming different
methods to find Piles
capacity and settlement

for single pile and pile group.
12T2, Learning procedures to
1S2911, analyses laterally

Laterally Various methods for laterally loaded pile
loaded Pile analysis
loaded Pile

Earth Various Heres for computation of earth 11 T1, Learning different
pressures pressures, Pressure theories, IRC:6, 7-R1 approaches of earth
theories Coulomb and “Nankine approaches, smooth pressures theories
and rough walls, inclined backfill, depth of
tension crack, lateral pressure due to
surcharge loads
Earth Classification and selection of different
retaining type of retaining walls. Analysis of
structures different types of retaining walls, stability
condition, Advantages and applications of
reinforced earth walls, Indian case
histories,
Dynamic Dynamic properties of soil, using
Properties of | laboratory and field tests. Evaluation and
Soil interpretation of geotechnical reports,
selecting foundation design parameters
from laboratory and field tests. Code of
practices.
Machine General requirements and design criteria foundation. Stiffness and damping parameters,
Analysis and design of block foundations
for reciprocating machines, Limitations of
BIS code of practices
Geosynthetic | Introduction to designing with
S geosynthetics, for various applications

17T2, 19 T1, R5, 8- | Selection and analysis
of retaining walls,

R1, R2, R3, IS 5249 | Evaluation of dynamic
Properties of Soil

Analysis and design of

R2, R3, IS 2974 foundations for
different type of
machines.

 

17 T2, R3, IRC | Learning Geosynthetics
codes, notes applications
benefits

such as foundation, GRS wall & slopes,
roads, drainage and filtration.

   
  
   

Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

Soil stabilization and ground improvement
techniques for difficult or problematic
ground conditions, anti-liquefaction
measures, Dynamic compaction, Vibro
techniques, preloading, vertical drains,
PVD, stone columns, grouting, micropile
etc., Successful case histories.

improvement
techniques

Introduction

Basics of soil dynamics, seismic design
to guidelines for foundations and

geotechnical
earthquake
engineering

geotechnical structure, liquefaction of soil,
screening criterion, evaluation of
liquefaction potential.

T otal

5T2, Ch 15 R4, 21
T1, 16 R1, 29, 30,
31R3, IRC
guidelines, IS
13094, IS 15284:
Part 1,2, other IS
codes and notes

Class notes,
1S1893-part1-2016,
code of practices,
Ch.12 R4,

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani

Learning ground
improvement
techniques principles,

advantages, limitations

and selection.
repair/strengthening
measures for
foundations

Learning basic concepts
of geotechnical
earthquake engineering
and liquefaction of soils

Stability of | Stability of slopes, limit equilibrium 10 T1, IRC-75 Methods of Stability of
slopes methods, methods of slices, highway slopes
embankments
i

6. Evaluation Scheme:

(Yo )
AUGSD

 

120 Min. A0 Will be announced by
AUGSD
30 Continuous during class
and/ or take home
7. Consultation Hour: To be announced in the class
8. Notices: Notices will be sent to your BITS email id only.

9, Make-up Policy: Make-up would be granted only for genuine cases with prior permission.
10. Note (if any): Reading assignments will be given whenever necessary.

2
44 |

Nature of component
(Close Book/ O pen Book)

Open Book
Closed Book

Open Book

Instructor-in-charge
Course No.
