BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

 

 

SECOND SEMESTER 2020-21
COURSE HANDOUT
Date: 18.01.2021
In addition to part -I (General Handout for all courses appended to the time table) this portion gives further
specific details regarding the course.

Course No. : CE F415
Course Title : DESIGN OF PRESTRESSED CONCRETE STRUCTURES
Instructor-in-charge :MANOJ KUMAR

1. Course Description:

This course deals with the study of various pre-stressing techniques, pre-stressing systems, analysis of pre-stressed
concrete members, various losses in pre-stress, load balancing concept, determination of cable profiles in simply
supported prestressed girders, limit state design of simply supported prestressed concrete girders for flexure, shear
and serviceability, and the design of anchorage zone.

2. Scope and Objective of the C ourse

Prestressed concrete design is an advance design technique of structural systems. The clear understanding of solid
mechanics and design of reinforced concrete is prerequisite for this course. The primary objective of the course is to
make students grasp the concepts of prestressed concrete and to enable them for designing the structural elements
using steel stands. At end of the course, students will have the basic concepts of analysis and design of prestressed

concrete structural elements required for supporting heavy loads and sustaining higher level of deformations.

3. Text Book

(i) Praveen Nagarajan, Prestressed concrete Design, Pearson Ed., New Delhi, 2013.

4, Reference Book

(i) IS 1343: 2012 Indian Standard Code of Practice for Prestressed concrete, BIS New Delhi.
(ii) IS 14268: 2017 Indian Standard, Uncoated Stress Relieved Low Relaxation Seven-Wire (Ply) Strand for
Prestressed Concrete, BIS, New Delhi.

5. Course Plan:

outcomes

1. Basic Principles
of Prestressing

Materials for
Prestressed
Concrete

Losses in
Prestress

Lectures 1-5

Need for Prestressed Concrete, Structural
Behaviour of Prestressed Concrete Members,
Methods of Prestressing; Post-tensioning
systems; Classifications of Prestressed
Concrete Members; Comparison with
Reinforced Concrete

Lectures 6-7

High tensile strength steel for Prestressing,
Properties of High Tensile steel, High
compressive strength concrete for Prestressing,
properties of High compressive strength
concrete

Lectures 8-T2

Short-term Losses in Prestress

Loss Due to Elastic Shortening of Concrete;
Loss Due to Friction; Loss Due to Slip in
Anchorage

 

To understand basic
principle of
Prestressing and
advantages of
prestressed members
over reinforced
members

To understand the
necessity of high
strength materials
and their properties

To determine various
losses in Prestress
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

Long-term Losses in Prestress

Loss Due to Shrinkage of Concrete; Loss Due

to Creep of Concrete; Loss Due to Relaxation

of Steel;

Total Loss in Prestress

Lectures 13-20

Analysis of Section at Elastic Stage:

Methods of Elastic Analysis of prestressed

sections: Combined Load A pproach; Internal

Couple Approach; Equivalent Load approach

Load Balancing

Decompression Moment; Cracking Moment

Additional Stress in Tendon; Due to Bending

Flexural Behaviour of Prestressed Concrete

Members; Modes of Failure in Flexure;

Types of Section;

Analysis of section at Ultimate stage:

Analysis of Rectangular Sections with Bonded

Tendons; Analysis of Post-tensioned

Rectangular; Analysis of post-tensioned

beams having Unbonded Tendons; Analysis of

Flanged Sections

Lectures 21-26

Governing Inequalities; Minimum Section

Modulus; Design of Prestressing Force; Magnel

Diagram; Cable Zone; Selection of Cross
sectional dimensions; Requirements for

Flexural Reinforcement: Concrete Cover;

Spacing of Tendons, Minimum Longitudinal

Steel, Minimum Side Face Reinforcement,

Steps for Flexural design of Prestressed

Concrete Members

Lectures 27-33

Effect of Prestress on Shear Strength

6. Design of Of concrete; Identification of Zones for Shear To design the
section for Design; Ultimate Shear Resistance of concrete; , prestressed sections
Shear Design of Shear Reinforcement; Minimum Shear for Shear

Reinforcement; Maximum Ultimate Shear Force

Steps for Shear Design of Prestressed members

Lectures 34-37

Design of Anchorage Zones in Pre-Tensioned

Members:

Bond Mechanisms; Transmission Length;

Flexural Bond Length; Development Length;

End Zone Reinforcement

Anchorage Zones in Post-Tensioned Members:

Bearing Stresses Behind Anchorage; Bursting

Forces in Anchorage Zones; End Zone

Reinforcement

8 Deflections in Lectures 38-40 To check the design
Bresineecod Deflections in Un-cracked Beams; Short-term | Ch. 8 the prestressed
Deflection at Transfer; Long Term Deflection at sections for

To grasp
understanding about
the flexural response
of prestressed
sections at Service
and ultimate stage

4. Analysis of
Prestressed
Concrete
Sections

9. Design of
Prestressed
Concrete
Sections for
Flexure

To design the
prestressed sections
for flexure

7. Design of
Anchorage
Zone

To design the
anchorage zone of
prestressed sections

 
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

Concrete Service Condition; Deflection Limits in serviceability
girders prestressed girders requirement

6. Evaluation Scheme

Weichtace Nature of
S.N. | Evaluation Component | Duration (6) J Date & Time component
(OB/CB)

 

 

Mid-Sem Test [S0Minuis| 35 TBAbyAUGSD| OB
3 | Clas test Quizes Sg a

2 | Compre. Exam. 3 Hours A() 07/05 FN

 

7. Chamber Consultation Hour: To be announced in the class.
8. Notice: Notice if any, concerning this course will be uploaded at Nalanda or communicated through institute
e-mail.
9, Make-up Policy: Make-up will be granted only to genuine cases. For cases related to illness, proper
documentary evidence is essential. Prior permission is necessary if student is out of station on the test date.

Instructor-in-charge
CE F415
