BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

SECOND SEMESTER 2020-21
COURSE HANDOUT
Date: 18.01.2021
In addition to Part-I (General Handout for all courses appended to the time table) this portion gives further
specific details regarding the course.

Course No. : CE F420
Course Name : INTRO TO BRIDGE ENGG
Instructor-in-charge : MANOJ KUMAR

1. Course Description:

This course deals with the planning and investigations for bridges, understanding the behaviour of different
type of bridge superstructures, economical span and basis for selecting suitable form of superstructure for
given location, types of loads considered for highway and railway bridges, design of various culverts and
bridges, design of pier and abutments, and design aspects of foundations for abutments and piers.

2. Scope and Objective of the C ourse:

Bridges are inseparable part of any communication network as they are the key elements in rail and highway
network. This course intends to impart skills for planning and analysis & design of different types of highway
bridge structures at basic as well as at advance level. This course will introduce the various components of
bridges and different type of bridges to the students. Standard loading standards developed by IRC which
form a consistent basis for design will be introduced. Moreover, in this course the theory and design of pipe
culverts, RC slab culverts, arch culverts, composite bridges and T- Beam Bridges will be discussed in details
while the long span bridges will be introduced. Furthermore, this course will cover the theory and design of
substructures (piers and abutments), foundations and bearings which is an important part of bridge
engineering.

3. Text Book (TB):

1. Krishna Raju, N. (2014) “Design of Bridges”, 6 Edition, Oxford & IBH Publishing Co. Pvt. Ltd.,
New Delhi.

4. Reference Books (RB):

1. Johnson Victor, D. (2010), “Essentials of Bridge Engineering”, 6" Edition, Oxford & IBH Publishing
Co. Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi.

2. SP 13:2004: Guidelines for Design of Small Bridges and Culverts, Special Publication, Indian Road
Congress.

3. SP 20:2002: Rural Roads Manual, Special Publication, Indian Road Congress (Chapter 7)

4, SP 64: 2005: Guidelines for the Analysis and Design of Cast-in-place V oided Slab Superstructures,
Indian Road Congress.

9. IRC: 5-2015, “Standard Specifications and code of Practice for road bridges: section I-General
features of Design’, Indian Road Congress.

6. IRC: 6-2017, “Standard Specifications and code of Practice for road bridges: section H-Loads and
Stresses”, Indian Road Congress, 5th revision.

7. IRC: 112-2011, “Code of Practice for Concrete Road bridges, Indian Road Congress

8. IRC: 22-2015, “Standard Specifications and code of Practice for Road Bridges: section VI-Composite
Construction, Indian Road Congress.
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

9, IRC:78-2014, “Standard Specifications and code of Practice for road bridges: section VH-Foundation
and Substructures”’, Indian Road Congress

10. IRC:83-2002, “Standard Specifications and code of Practice for road bridges: section IX (Part I)Metallic Bearings, (Part II)- Elastomeric Bearings and (Part III)-Pot, Pot-Cum-PTFE, Pin and metallic
guide Bearings, Indian Road Congress.

 

5. Course Plan:

Module No. Lecture Session Reference Learning outcomes

L1-5: Components of bridges and various General features of
definitions, Classification and general IRC 5, RB: Ch. 1- | various Types of
I: General features of different types of bridges, 2 Bridges and selection
features of Road | Planning of bridges, Collection of Data, of Bridge Site
bridges Effective Linear water way, Economical IRC 5. RB: Ch1- Planning of Bridge
Investigations | span, Afflux, Freeboard, vertical jo
for Bridges clearance, kerbs

2
L6-7: Choice of bridge type, Width of IR C5, Selection of bridge
carriage way, Clearances TB: Ch. 3 Super structure type

Ib L L8-10: Different types of loads and their Loads to be

: Loads on ar ; IRC 6, ; .

Bridges combinations considered for the design TB: Ch3 considered in Design

of Roadway bridges super structures of Highway Bridges

III: General L11: Traffic aspects of highway bridges, Deciding no. of
Design aesthetics, relative costs of bridge TB: Ch. 5 Lanes and clearances
considerations components

L12-15: Effective width and Effective Design of Slab

Length of dispersion of vehicular Loads, | TB: Art. 4.4, 5.2- | culverts

IV: Analysis and Analysis of solid slab, voided slab and 9.3, Ch. 6

skew slab culverts

Design of L16-18: Classification of RCC pipes Design of Pipe
ements design principles of Pipe culverts
culverts, determination of design forces a Culverts
L22-25: Components of T-beam bridges, Design of Deck slab
Analysis of intemal deck slab panels T-beam Bridges
using Pigeaud’s method, analysis of
cantilever slabs,
L26-29: Load distribution among Live Load
longitudinal girders according to (1) Distribution in the
Courbon’s method, (ii) Guyon & TB: Art. 4.4, 8.2- | Longitudinal girders
Massonet method, and (iii) Hendry- 8.6 of T-beam Bridges

Jaegar method, Analysis of longitudinal
girders and cross beams

VI: Design of L30-31: Fatigue strength of steel, design | TB: Ch. 9, IRC Design of Plate
Steel Bridges plate girders with lateral bracings 24 girders

VII: Analysis of | L32-35: Design of composite bridges Design of Shear
composite with various types of shear connectors TB: Ch. 10 Connectors in
bridges Composite bridges

V: Analysis and
Design of
Reinforced
Concrete Tbeam Bridges

 
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani

Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

VIII: Design of | L35-37: Types of bearings, design of Design of
: TB: Ch. 16 . .
bearings Elastomeric pad bearings Elastomeric bearings

IX: Design of L38-40: Design of Pier & Abutment Design of A butments
Bridge Piers & __| Caps, Forces acting on Piers & TB: Ch. 18 and Piers
A butments Abutments, design of piers & A butments

 

   
 

X: Bridge L41-42: Types of foundations, scour TB: Ch, 19 Design of Bridge
Foundations depth, Forces considered on Foundation a Foundations

6. Evaluation Scheme:

. , , Nature of component |
Evaluation Component | Duration (% ) Date & Time (OB/CB)

Mid-Sem Test-I TBA by AUGSD OB
Compre. Exam. 11/05 FN OB
25

clesTewQumeliaeig | = | 5 | = | CO

 

7. Chamber Consultation Hour: To be announced in the class by the Instructor.

8. Notice: Notice if any, concerning this course will be uploaded at Nalanda or communicated through institute
e-mail.

9, Make up policy: Make-up will be granted only to genuine cases. For cases related to illness, proper
documentary evidence is essential. Prior permission is necessary if student is out of station on the test date.

Instructor-in-charge

CE F420
