BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

 

SECOND SEMESTER 2020-21
COURSE HANDOUT
Date: 19.01.2021

In addition to part -| (General Handout for all courses appended to the time table) this portion gives further
specific details regarding the course.

Course No. : CE F343

Course Title : Design of Steel Structures

Instructor-in-charge : SHAMSHER BAHADUR SINGH

Co-Instructor: Dr. Dipendu Bhunia

Tutorial Instructors : Dr. S.B. Singh, Dr. Dipendu Bhunia, Mr. Ankit Mehra Mr. Manigandan

1. Course Description

The course intends to impart adequate analysis and design skills for common type of Civil Engineering Steel Structures as
found in practice. An understanding of theory, loads and stresses to be used as per Indian standards for steel design work
will be developed. This course deals with designing of tension, compression and bending members along with bolted and
welded connections in structures using limit state method of design. Design of specific steel structure likes steel such as
trusses and plate girder will be covered. Furthermore, plastic analysis and design of basic structures such as beams and
pane frames will be introduced.

2. Scope and Objective of the C ourse:
Course on Design of Steel Structures is designed for first-degree students of Civil Engineering Discipline. The clear

understanding of structural mechanics and/ or strength of materials is prerequisite for this course. The primary
objectives of the course are:

(i) to know the difference between fundamentals of Allowable Stress Design (ASD) and Limit State
Design (LSD) Approaches.

(ii) to analyze tension and compression members

(iii) to design flexural members such as beams

(iv) to design plate girders demonstrated through design example

(v) to design bolted and welded connections in steel structures

(vi) to understand the concepts of plastic analysis and design of beams and basic plane frame structures

(vii) to develop skills for using commercial softwares for analysis and design of typical steel framed
structures as course project to be executed over the whole semester
PREREQUISITES: (1) Course No. CE F241: Analysis of Structures

3. Text Book

(i) N. Subramanian, “Design of Steel Structures”, Oxford University Press, 2015.
(ii) Teaching Resource for Structural Steel Design, Volume 1, 2 & 3. Institute for Steel Development & Growth, ISPAT
Niketan 52/1A Ballygunge, Circullow Road, Calcutta 700019.

4. Reference Book
 

iii)
iv)
v)
vi)
vii)
viii)
ix)

x)
xi)
xii)
xiii)
xiv)

xv)

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

A S Arya and Ajmani "Design of Steel Structures” Nemi Chand & Bros.

C. G. Salmon and John E. Johnson, “Steel Structures: Design and Behavior,” Fourth Edition, Prentice Hall, NJ, USA
M.L. Gambhir, “Fundamentals of Structural Steel Design,” McGraw Hill Education Ltd., New Delhi, 2013.

S. K. Duggal, “Limit State Design of Steel Structures,” McGraw Hill Education (India) Ltd., New Delhi, 2014.

P. Dayaratnam “Design of Steel Structures”, Wheeler Pub. 1992.

E H Gaylord and C N Gaylord "Design of steel structures" McGraw Hill

P. Dayaratnam, “Handbook on design and detailing of structures", Wheeler Publishing 1994.

IS 800:2007 "Code of practice for General construction in steel "B.1.S.?

IS 875 :1987 "Code of practice for design Loads"

Design of Steel Structures- S Ramamrutham & R. Narayanan, Dhanpat Rai, Publishing co., (P) Ltd, New Delhi
110002, 2000.

B.C. Punmia, "Design of Steel Structures Volume | and II", Laxmi Publications (P) Ltd., New Delhi, 1998 (Eight
edition).

R. Englekirk, “Steel Structures: Controlling Behavior through Design,” Replika Press Pvt. Ltd. Kundli, India, 1994.
K. M. Ghosh, “Analysis and Design Practice of Steel Structures,” PHI, New Delhi, 2010.

B.S. Smith and A. Coull, “Tall Building Structures: Analysis and design,” Wiley India Pvt Ltd. New Delhi, 2011.

S. N. Manohar, “Tall Chimneys: Design and Construction,” Tata McGraw Hill Publishing Company Ltd., New Delhi,
1985.

5. Course Plan:

N
2
3
4

Design of Tension | TB, (Ch.7) | Introduction, Types of sections, Net area, Net effective
Members section for angles and Tees in tension, Design of tension
(Lectures 11-13)

 

Module | Lecture Session | Reference | Learning outcomes

0.
1.
3.

Introduction: Steel Types of loads, types of steel for various structural elements. Types
Design of connections for structural framing, factor of safety, partial safety
Specifications factors, load factors, steel vs. concrete, standard specifications,
(Lectures: 1-5) introduction to limit states and working stress design.

Types of | TB,Ch.5-6 | To understand the various types of structural steel
Connections

connections: such as riveted, bolted & welded connections
(Lectures 6-10)

members with Riveted/ Bolted End Connections, Lug Angles,
Tension Splice, Members with Welded Connections, Shear
Lag effects

Design of | TB,Ch.9 | General theory of columns, Allowable stresses for
Compression

members
(Lectures 14-18)

compression members, general specifications for
compression members, Design of built-up compression
members, single and double lacings, batten plates, and
column bases

Design of Beams: | TB(Ch.10) | Design Criteria, stresses in beams and permissible stresses, lateral
(Lectures: 19-25) stability of beams with unrestrained compression flanges, effective
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

Design
Connections
(Lectures: 25-30)

Design of Plate
Girders:
(Lectures:31-35)

of | TB,Ch.5-6

TB (Ch.11)

Design of Gantry

Girder
(Lectures: 36-40)

TB, Ch.12

Plastic Analysis
and Design
(Lectures: 40-43)

Tutorials plus regular

assignment

Design Project on Analysis and
Steel
Structures using Commercial

Design of Framed

Software (Report and

Comprehensive Viva-Voce

Examination)

Class Test (1 No)

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani

Simple Beam and end connections, design of framed
connections, design of stiffened seat connection, eccentric
connections

Design of web, flanges, curtailment of flanges, connection of
flanges with webs, stiffeners, web and flange splices,
economic depth of plate girders and Complete design principle
of plate girder and detailing showing locations and geometry
of intermediate and bearing stiffeners.

Understand the features of Crane girders and gantry girders,
evaluation of basic design load effects such as maximum
bending moment and maximum shear force for gantry girders
depending upon whether the crane girder is manually or
electrically operated.

Plastic Analysis, and Design of simple beams and frames,
shape factors, plastic hinge mechanism, theory of plastic
bending, ultimate load of beams and simple frames

Percenta

ge
weightag

Date & | Remarks
Time

Announced

e

Executed during
Semester
be
completed at least

whole
and will
a week before the
end of the class
work

in the class

 
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

Teaching Method: Teaching of the subject will be made by combination of power-point presentation and Blackboard

writing. Most of the teaching will be based on blackboard writing. Necessary instructional materials (available and
prepared by instructor) will also be supplied for ready reference through NALANDA website platform.

*
The project will be assigned to the students individually or in a group. The students will be working in consultation with instructor
in-charge. There will be two evaluations (1) Midterm report (5% weightage) (2) Final Report (5% weightage) in the form of term
paper based on computer analysis and results followed by comprehensive viva-voce examination (10% weightage).

7. Chamber Consultation Hour: 3-5 PM (Monday to Friday)

8. Notices: Civil Engineering Department Notice Boards and/ or through NALANDA website

9, Make-up Policy: Only genuine cases with prior information will be granted makeup for Midterm test and
Comprehensive examination. However, no makeup will be given for other components of evaluation.

10. Note (if any): Assignments and/ or any class notes may be sent to students through NALANDA website
platform.

Instructor-in-charge
Course No. CE F343

E-mail: sbsingh@ pilani.bits-pilani.ac.in; sbsinghbits@ gmail.com
Mobile: 9414648283; Landline: 01596-255649 (during working hours only)
