BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

SECOND SEMESTER 2020-21
COURSE HANDOUT
Date: 18.01.2021

In addition to part I (General Handout for all courses appended to the Time table) this portion gives further
specific details regarding the course.

Course No : CE F244

Course Title : Highway Engineering

Instructor-in-C harge : Dr. B. S. Shashank

Lecture Instructor : Dr. B. S. Shashank

Tutorial Instructors : Dr. B. S. Shashank & Dr. Sarah Abraham

Practical Instructors : Dr. B. S. Shashank, Dr. Sarah Abraham, R. Manigandan, Farhan M.

Khan, Anant Mishra, & Patil Deshbhushan Savindra

1. Course Description:

Overview of basic characteristics of Transportation systems, social factors and strategic consideration, Road
development plans, Highway development projects in India, Road Development organizations, Stages in
highway alignment and Detailed project Report preparation, Introduction to transportation planning,
Geometric design Standards: Cross section elements, sight distances, horizontal and vertical alignments,
Pavement Material Characterization: Aggregate testing and blending, Bitumen and Bituminous Concrete
testing and mixture design protocols, introduction to Superpave Mixture Design protocols, IRC methods for
the design of flexible and rigid highway pavements, Overview of different stages in flexible and rigid highway
construction, Overview of Highway Evaluations and Maintenance, Traffic Engineering: Traffic
Characteristics, Highway capacity and level of service concepts, Traffic measurement and analysis, Traffic
signals, parking studies and analysis, traffic accidents, Introduction to Intelligent Transportation Systems.
Exposure to relevant software.

2. Scope and Objective of the Course: The objective of the course is to introduce students to the
transportation systems, with specific focus on the planning and design of highways.

3. Text Books:

T1. Kadiyali L. R. and Lal, N. B. (2013): Principles and practices of Highway Engineering, K hanna
Publishes, New Delhi

T2. Khanna, $.K. and Justo A, and V eeraragavan, A. (2015): Highway Engineering, Nem Chand and Bros.
Roorkee (U.P.)

4, Reference Books:
R1. Kadiyali L R; Traffic Engineering and Transportation Planning; Khanna Publishers, New Delhi; 2003.

R2. Papacoastas, C. S. and Prevedouros: Transportation Engineering and Planning, Third Edition; Pearson
Education, 2008

R3. Chakroborty, P. and Das, A., Principles of Transportation Engineering, PHI, New Delhi, 2003.
R4. Garber, Nicholas J., and Lester A. Hoel. Traffic and Highway Engineering. Cengage Learning, 2014.
R5. Relevant standards (IS, IRC, ASTM)
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

5. Course Plan:

_— No. of ,
vou Description °° Reference | Learning Objective

‘ Lectures
Overview of basic characteristics
of Transportation systems, social | 1 T1,T2 Understanding IanSPOTanon
factors and strategic engineering and its needs.
consideration

Road development plans,
Highway development projects in 1 T1LT12 Understand the highway
India, Road Development development in India.
organizations,
Stages in highway alignment and
Detailed project Report TT Understand the highway project
preparation ,
and planning

Introduction to transportation PTL TA T2
planning

iw

-— ~~] OO KO —

Poe T2,

To learn aggregate’s
characterization for highway

To learn bitumen’s
; ert T2, ae ;
Bitumen THT ores for highway

Vo T2,

O1

Aggregate testing and blending

Mixture design protocols

Asphalt mix design

Bituminous Concrete testing
Mixture performance testing

oe
Understand the concepts of

9 TL T2 pavement design and learn to
design flexible and concrete
pavement

Introduction to Superpave
Mixture Design protocols

IRC methods for the design of
flexible

 
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

wage To learn rigid pavement

Rigid highway pavements T1, T2 structural design

Overview of different stages in T1, T2,

2 flexible and rigid highway 2 To leam highway construction

construction Ro
Overview of Highway 9 T1, T2, To understand different failures
Evaluations and Maintenance R5 and their maintenance

4 Cross section elements, , 1 T1, T2

15 Sight distances T1, T2 To learn highway geometric

elements and their design

horizontal and vertical 5 TL T2
alignments

7 Traffic Characteristics, T1,T2

Highway capacity andlevelot | , T1, T2 To learn traffic flow parameters
service concepts,
and their design
2

Trafic measurement and T1, T2
analysis,

 

—
—

  

—

—
CO

—

—

20 Traffic signals 1 T1, T2

To understand traffic
management and safety

21 Parking studies and analysis, T1, T2
22 Traffic accidents, T1, T2

Introduction to Intelligent .
Transportation Systems. TM, Te Ovenmaw: ot ITs
6. Evaluation Scheme:

Component Duration | Weightage Date & Time Nature of component
(% ) (Close Book/ Open Book)
Co

i)

Mid-Semester Test <TEST 1> CB
mprehensive 3h 45 <TEST C> CB

Examination

quiz

teponiow (ua) [|B a
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

 

7. Chamber Consultation Hour: Sat 10:00 AM to 11:00 AM
8. Notices: Notices, if any, will be communicated through E-mail or in the class
9, Make-up Policy:

e Make up will be granted only on genuine reasons and will be considered on a case by case basis.
However, prior permission is a must.

e For medical cases, a certificate must be produced.

e No makeups will be offered for tutorial and practical sessions.

10. Note (if any): Course related instructions will be given in the class throughout the semester.

Laboratory C omponents:

Reference

IS 2720-7

IS 2720-16
3  _|PenetrationTest CSS 1203

IS 1208

IS 1209

6 | Softening PointTest IS 1205

IS 1206 (Part II)
_ 8 | AggregateAbrasiontest CTS. 2386 (Part IV)
_ 9 |ImpactTest CS 2386 (Part IV)
IS 2386 (Part III)
1S 2386 (Part I!)
IS 2386 (Part I)
| 13 |SpotSpeed STL RI

T1; R3

_ 15 | Marshall MixtureDesign sd TL; RB, RS (MS 2)

Instructor-in-charge
Course No. CE F244
