BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

SECOND SEMESTER 2020-21
COURSE HANDOUT
Date: 11.03.2021

In addition to part I (General Handout for all courses appended to the Time table) this portion gives further
specific details regarding the course.

Course No : CE G516

Course Title : Multi-Criteria A nalysis in Engineering
Instructor-in-C harge : AJIT PRATAP SINGH

Instructor(s) :

T utorial/Practical Instructors:
1. Course Description:

Introduction, Conventional optimization, Multi-objective Optimization, Fuzzy logic and its extensions, in
multi-objective optimization, Multicriterion Decision Making, Deterministic analysis, Stochastic analysis,
Fuzzy analysis, Classification problems, Hybrid approaches in Decision Making, Genetic Algorithms,
Artificial Intelligence, Artificial Neural networks, Practical applications in Engineering.

2. Scope and Objective of the C ourse:

Multi-criteria analysis (MCA) is a valuable and increasingly widely-used tool to aid decision making where
there is a choice to be made between competing options. It is particularly useful as a tool for evaluating various
options in context to infrastructure systems engineering and management where a complex and interconnected range of environmental, social and economic issues must be taken into consideration and where
objectives are often competing, making trade-offs unavoidable. It provides a robust and transparent decisionmaking structure, making explicit the key considerations and the values attributed to them, and providing
opportunities for stakeholder and community participation. MCA can be applied at all levels of decisionmaking, from the consideration of project alternatives to broad-reaching policy decisions guiding a transition
towards sustainability and the green economy. This course is an introduction to the field of multi-criterion
decision making and allied fields so that student can learn where and how to search for the best solutions of
real-life multi-criteria problems. Various advanced mathematical programming techniques (multi-objective
optimization, artificial neural networks, fuzzy logic etc.) will also be covered along with practical applications
and case studies. The unified approach will enable students to tackle the real-life problems in more
comprehensive manner and provide a broader view on the subject.

3. Text Books:

T1.Saaty, T.L. and Luis G. Vargas Models, Methods, Concepts & Applications of the Analytic Hierarchy
Process, Kluwer Academic, 2001.

T2. Rajasekharan S. and G. A. Vijaylakshmi Pai, Neural Networks, Fuzzy Logic, and Genetic Algorithms,
Prentice-Hall of India, New Delhi, Eighth Edition 2007.

4, Reference Books:

R1. Kartalopoulos, $.V., Understanding Neural Networks and Fuzzy Logic, Prentice-Hall of India, New Delhi,
2002.

R2. Deb, K., Multi-Objective Optimization using Evolutionary Algorithms, John Wiley and Sons, Ltd,
Singapore, 2001.

R3. Ross, T.J., Fuzzy Logic with Engineering Applications, John Wiley and Sons, Inc., New Delhi, 2005.
 

5. Course Plan:

Module No

1
3,4
6,

9,10, 11

12, 13, 14, 15
16, 17, 18, 19

20, 21, 22, 23, 24

2
,O
7,8

25, 26, 27, 28

Lecture Session

Conceptual framework and scope of

the course in decision making process,

Classification of MCDA Problems:
Discrete and Continuous Cases.

Introduction, Criteria, Social criteria,
Economic critena, environmental

criteria, Constructing the Hierarchy of

the Criteria

Dominance method, Sequential
Optimization(SO), Simple Additive
Weighting (SAW), Distance Based
Methods (DBM), Analytic Hierarchy
Process (AHP), Case studies and
Discussions

Dominance Method, Sequential
Optimization, Simple Additive
Weighting, Distance Based Methods,
Case Studies Discussions

Necessity of optimization, Linear
Programming and other conventional
methods, Numerical problems, Goal
programming, Weighting and
Constraint methods, Numerical
problems

Multi-attribute utility theory and
Outranking methods:

PROMETHEE method, Compromise
Programming, EX PROM

Introduction, Probabilistic methods,
Certain equivalents, Fuzzy methods:
Fuzzy arithmetic, Membership
functions, Fuzzy relations, Fuzzy
decision making Probabilistic- Fuzzy
MCDA Models, Case studies, LongTerm watershed, management,
Conservation or new water transfers
Fuzzy Linear Programming: Single
and multiple objective

CH-2, 3 (T-1)

CH-3, 6 (T-1),
Supplementary
Notes

CH-3, 6 (T-1),
Supplementary
Notes

CH-4, 6, 12 (T
2),
Supplementary
Notes

CH-10, 11 (T2),
Supplementary
Notes

 

 

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

Introduction to Multicriteria Decision
Analysis: Its Role in
Planning and
Management

Study of hierarchy of
the Criteria

Study of solution
techniques for Discrete
MCDA Problems

Study of solution
techniques for
Continuous MCDA
Problems

Study of Conventional
optimization and MultiObjective Optimization

Study of solution
techniques for MultiCriterion Decision
Making analysis under
different environments
Study of MCDA
Problems Under
Uncertainty: Fuzzy
logic and Decision
making

Fuzzy multi-objective
optimization
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

29, 30, 31 Social choice methods, Plurality CH-8, 12, 13 Study of Sociovoting, Borda count, Hare system (T-1), economic Choice
(Successive Deletion), Dictatorship, Supplementary | Methods
Pairwise comparisons, Case studies, Notes
Forest Treatment problem, Ranking
water resources Projects, Consensus
on the Results, Discussions

32, 33, 34, 35, 36 | Basics of Artificial Neural Networks, | CH-2,8(T2&_ | Introduction to
genetic algorithms and their R1) Artificial Neural
relationship to decision making Networks and Genetic

Algorithms

37, 38, 39 Measures of association — Correlation, | Supplementary | Analysis of more than
Chi-square distance, Jaccard index, Notes one response variables
Euclidean distance, Principal through Multivariate
Components Analysis, Redundancy techniques

analysis etc.

AQ to 42 Application to various aspects of civil | Supplementary / Practical case studies
engineering Notes and
Journals of
International
Repute

6. Evaluation Scheme:
(% ) (Close Book/ Open Book)
class from time to time.
°
Examination
Project*/ Assignment | To be announced in the class from time to time. Two
evaluative assignments will also be conducted).
*Project/Assignment: During the semester, each student will work in a team (of maximum two students) on
a project dealing with a decision problem relevant to civil engineering and infrastructure systems planning
and management. This project will be devoted to any the broad topics covered in the course such as analytic
hierarchy process, analytic network process, fuzzy decision making, multi-objective optimization, artificial
neural networks, genetic algorithms etc. Each group of students will work on the project related to his area of

interest/work/research. This project may or may not involve software like MATLAB, expert choice and other
software available on internet etc.

 

 

The projects typically may be of interdisciplinary in nature and may consider various aspects of civil
engineering. There will be two presentations in a semester by each group to discuss the progress of their
project work among all registered students and the I/C and submit a final project report.

The purposes of the project are:
1. To enable you to explore in-depth aspects of the subject of multi-criteria analysis.
2. To provide experience in the formulation, execution and presentation of an engineering investigation
in the area of multi-criteria decision making methods.

3
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

3. To provide a teamwork experience dealing with the interdisciplinary nature of the project.

Steps in Carrying out the Project
The steps in carrying out the project are:
1. Prepare a proposal outline in MS Word and email it to the instructor specifying the objective of your
project and outlining how you plan to go about executing it by 31 January 2021.
2. Present an oral report in class on the date posted on the class assignment web page.
3. Send a written report (in MS Word) to the instructor on the date posted on the class assignment web
page.
Before beginning your project, you need to prepare a project proposal and submit it to the instructor for
approval and feedback. This proposal should be about one page in length. The instructor will review the
proposals and provide comments for the student to revise the proposal for final submittal and approval. The
proposal should contain:
e A minimum of 5 bibliographic citations relevant to your proposed project.
Definition of the problem including relevant background.
Discussion (preliminary) of the proposed methods of solution of the problem.
Anticipated data needs.
Anticipated problems in carrying out the project.
Team members with ID. No. and Name
Assignment of tasks to team members.

7. Chamber Consultation Hour: Tuesday 9" Hour at 2112

8. Notices: All notices concerning the course will be displayed on Civil Engineering Department Notice
Board/Google Class Room.

9, Make-up Policy:
1. Make-up will be granted only on genuine reasons. However, prior permission is must.
2. Formedical cases, a certificate from the concerned physician of the Medical Centre must be produced.
3. Please also refer item no. 6 on page 2 of Part I of course handout mentioned in the Timetable for
Second Semester 2020-21 for more details.

10. Note (if any): Academic honesty and academic integrity are to be maintained by all of the students
throughout the Semester and no type of academic dishonesty is acceptable.

Instructor-in-charge
CE G516
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

SECOND SEMESTER, 2020-2021
(Outline of the course: To be filled in consultation with the I/C)

Course No.: CE G516
Course Title: Multi-Criteria Analysis in Engineering
Date of Submission of Outline:
Name of the student: ID No:

Topic of the course work:

Aim and Scope of the Study:

Plan of Work:

References:

Student’s Signature A pproved/Disapproved
Date: Signature of the instructor

*The registered student must submit duly filled above outline after verification from the Instructor-in-charge of
the course, Prof. A. P. Singh latest by 31.01.2021.
