BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

 

SECOND SEMESTER 2020-2021
COURSE HANDOUT
Date: 11.03.2021

In addition to part I (General Handout for all courses appended to the Time table) this portion gives further
specific details regarding the course.

Course No : CE G562
Course Title : Advanced C oncrete Technology
Instructor-in-C harge : Dr. Mukund Lahoti

1. Objective of the course and Course Description:

This course aims to provide comprehensive scientific insight of concrete ingredients and their influence on
hydration kinetics. At the end of this course, the students will able to apply their knowledge in modem
concrete practices. The course will provide in-depth analysis into the composition and relevant chemistry of
concrete constituents. This course will elucidate the functional role and inherent chemistry of ingredients of
concrete through stoichiometry, hydration reactions and application of microanalysis techniques.
Furthermore, the course elaborates on the fundamental knowledge of fresh and hardened properties of
concrete, through the effect on concrete composition and the relevant chemistry. The course will describe
the degradation mechanism of concrete against different aggressive exposure conditions and design of
durable concrete. Additionally, this course will demonstrate techniques of Non-Destructive Evaluations
(NDE) of concrete structures. Moreover, it will describe utilization of waste materials as novel materials for
use in concrete and subsequently, the outlines for designing a concrete mix which fulfills the required
properties for fresh and hardened Portland cement concrete.

2. Text Books:

T1. Mehta, P. K., and Monteiro, P. J. M., “Concrete: Microstructure, Properties, and Materials”, 4th Ed.,
2013, McGraw-Hill Education, USA.

T2. Neville, A.M, “Properties of Concrete”, 4th Edition 1996, Addison Wesley Longman Limited, Harlow,
UK.

3. Reference Books:

R1: Taylor, H. F. W., “Cement Chemistry”, 2nd Ed., 1997, Thomas Telford Publishing, London, UK.
R2: Mindess, S., Y oung, J. F., and Darwin, D., “Concrete”, Second Ed., 2002, Pearson Edu, New Jersey,
USA.

R3: Malhotra, V. M., and Carino, N. J., “Handbook on Nondestructive Testing of Concrete”, Second Ed.,
2004, CRC Press, ASTM International, PA, USA.

R4: ASTM Standards, ACI Codes, IS Codes as necessary, and as referred in TB and RB (1 — 4).

Ro: Kett, I., “Engineered Concrete: Mix Design and Test Methods”, 2nd Ed. 2010, CRC Press, T & F, FL,
USA.

Ro: Newman, J. and Choo, B.S., “Advanced Concrete Technology”, Vol. 1 - 4, 2003, Butterworth —
Heinemann (ELSEVIER), MA, USA.
 

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani

Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

R7. Ramachandran and Beaudoin. Handbook of analytical techniques in concrete science and technology.

2002.

4, Course Plan:

Module Lecture Session Reference Learning outcomes
No.
1

Introduction: constituents; Cement: raw
materials, manufacturing process;
Composition and types, hydration, C-S-H

models; Tests of cement, paste and mortar;
microstructure of cementitious paste; heat of

hydration; calorimetry; tests on cement,
paste and mortar; microstructure of
cementitious paste.

Coarse and fine aggregates, Properties and
tests on aggregates, grading of aggregates
and its effect on concrete properties

Supplementary cementitious materials
(SCM): fly ash, slag, silica fume,
metakaolin, rice husk ash; difference
between pozzolanic and hydraulic SCM;
Influence of SCMs on fresh and hardened
properties of blended concrete.

Types of chemical admixtures- Super
plasticizers; V MA; Set controlling
chemicals, Air entraining admixtures;
Shrinkage reducing admixtures; Corrosion
inhibitors. chemical compositions of
admixtures; Mechanism of chemical
admixtures; effect of chemical admixtures
on concrete characteristics

Chi-—A4(T 1),

Ch6(T 1),
Ch 1, 3, 4, 5,
7 (R 1);

Ch1-—4(R 2)

 

Student will be able to
analyze components of
Concrete — Chemical
properties of cement and
cementitious paste.

Student will be able to
explain aggregates and
utilize them appropriately.

Student will be able to
"explain the chemistry of
mineral admixtures and
decide or justify their utility
in different situations.

Student will be able to
develop clear understanding
of the chemistry and
mechanism of chemical
admixtures.
 

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani

Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

X-ray diffraction (X RD), Fourier transform
infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy, scanning
electron microscopy (SEM), energy
dispersive X -ray spectroscopy (EDS),
nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR),
Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC),
Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA). NonDestructive Techniques for concrete
evaluation.

Effect of concrete composition on properties | Ch 9, 11, 12
of fresh concrete; effect of concrete

composition and curing on workability,

setting times, segregation, and bleeding of

fresh concrete. rheology of concrete

Effect of concrete composition on properties | Ch 13, 14, 16

of hardened concrete; shrinkage and creep; (TB 1)

correlation between micro- and specimen
level properties, interfacial transition zone.

Alkali silica reaction, freeze-thaw effect,
Salt attack, acid attack, sulfate attack,
corrosion of embedded steel rebar,
carbonation of concrete, durability tests;
Prediction of concrete service life

Special concretes: Light weight concrete,
FRC, HPC, SCC, Geopolymer concrete, etc.

R7- Ch 1-8

Student will be able to
compare and categorize
various material
characterization techniques
and design ways and means
for characterization of a
given material.

Student will be able to
explain the effect of
concrete composition on
concrete fresh properties
and design a concrete mix.

Student will be able to
explain the effect of
concrete composition on
hardened concrete
properties.

Student will be able to
examine various durability
issues of concrete and
recommend preventive
measures.

Student will be able to
categorize and design
special concretes

 
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

 

5. Evaluation Scheme:

Component Duration | Weightage Date & Time Nature of component
= (Close Book/ Open Book)

/Mid-SemesterTest Semester T est | 90min | 90min <T | <TEST.1> 1> | Closed book = book

MeSenee Tet paper, assignments, To —— announced Open a
presentation, etc.

Comprehensive 120 min 39 <TEST C> Closed book
Examination

6. Chamber C onsultation Hour: To be announced in class

 

7. Notices: Notices or announcements concerning the course will be communicated via emails or Nalanda.

8. Make-up Policy: Take prior permission from I/C. Make-up will be granted with prior permission, on a
case to case basis, only on genuine extraordinary reasons. For medical cases, a certificate from the
concerned doctor of the Medical Centre must be produced.

Instructor-in-charge
Course No. CE G562
