CE G 564: Structural Health Assessment and Rehabilitation

General Course Handout: Part-I

Introduction, Overview of present repair, retrofitting, and strengthening practices, Distress
identification, Repair management, Causes of deterioration and durability aspects, Holistic models
of Deterioration of RCC, Durability Aspects, Intrinsic and Extrinsic causes an stages of Distress,
Condition Survey and Non-destructive Evaluation, Classes of Damages and Repair Classification,
Structural Analysis and Design, Reserve Strength, Evaluation of Building Configuration, Repair
materials and their selection, Rehabilitation and Retrofitting Methods, Analysis and Design of
Extemally FRP and ECC Strengthened Structures, Retrofitting using External Unbonded Posttensioning and Near Surface Mounted FRP Rebars, Durability Based Design of FRP
Reinforced/Strengthened Bridge Girders, Case Study Problems.
C ourse Handout-Part II

In addition to Part | (General Handout for all courses appended to the time table) this portion gives further
specific details regarding the course.

Course No. : CE G564

Course Title: Structural Health Assessment and Rehabilitation

Civil Engineering Department, BITS Pilani, Pilani Campus

Course Description

This course deals with critical assessment of the health of structures especially reinforced concrete
structures and identification of the causes of deterioration along with design of suitable repair,
retrofitting, and external strengthening of deficient structural systems using conventional and highperformance materials such as polymer modified mortars and concrete, epoxy mortar and concrete, fiber
reinforced polymer (FRP) systems, composite fabric wrapping sheets, composite laminate, and
engineered cementitious composites. Moreover, condition survey and various non-destructive testings
as well as experimental tests to assess the quality of materials used in construction for determining the
reserve strength of structural members are discussed in detail. A special topic on structural health
monitoring using advanced sensors will be introduced for identification, location, and severity of damage
in structures. Furthermore, analysis and design of structures such as beams, bridge girders, walls, and
columns reinforced and/or strengthened with high-performance FRP materials are introduced. In
addition, special topics such as seismic retrofitting of columns and analysis of external FRP prestressed
bridge girders with case study problems are also presented and described.

Scope and Objective of the Course

Structural health assessment and rehabilitation is an advance course for Graduate and Postgraduate
students of structural and infrastructure engineering, and most important for practicing engineers
associated with private as well as government organizations such as Public Works Departments and
Central Public Works Department. The clear understanding of materials (steel, concrete, polymers, and
FRP), mechanics of solids and RCC design is prerequisite for this course. The primary objective of the
course is to make students understand the various causes of structural deficiency and durability aspects
along with knowing the characteristics of conventional and advance repair materials so that a deficient
structural system could be suitably rehabilitated using appropriate repair materials with optimum cost.
At the end of course, students will have general awareness of the nondestructive and partial destructive
techniques, and structural health monitoring techniques along with sensors to evaluate the structural
deficiency and methods of rehabilitation using appropriate repair materials. Furthermore, the student
Shall be capable of selecting health evaluation methods, tests, and diagnosis. Once the condition has been
assessed, the student shall be able to decide upon repair strategy, the method of repair, and compatible
materials. Most importantly, students will be able to analyze and design the structures reinforced,
prestressed, and or externally strengthened with high-performance composite materials such as FRP and
Engineered Cementitious Composites.

PREREQUISITES: (1) Course No. CE F211: Mechanics of Solids

(2) Course No. CE F 311: Design of Concrete Structures
Text Books (TB)

Handbook on Repairs and Rehabilitation of RCC Buildings, CPWD, Government of India, new
Delhi, 2002, 498 pp.

Analysis and Design of FRP Reinforced Concrete Structures, Shamsher Bahadur Singh, McGraw
Hill Education (India) Private Ltd., New Delhi, 2014, 323 pp.

Reference Books (RB)

1.

8.
oO.

Structural Health Monitoring of Large Civil Engineering Structures, Hua-Peng Chen, Wiley
Blackwell, John Wiley and Sons Ltd., NJ, USA.

Guide Book on Non-Destructive Testing of Concrete Structures, Training Course Series No. 17,
Report published by International Atomic Energy Agency, Vienna, 2002, 242 pp.

ISIS and SAMCO Educational Module 5, An Introduction to Structural Health Monitoring,
SAMCO Final Report 2006, F10-Teaching Materials (Available online).

Mechanics of Composite Materials, Robert M. Jones, Taylor and Francis, New York, London,
1999, First Indian Reprint, 2010, 519 pp.

Reinforced Concrete Design with FRP Composites, Hota V.S., Gangarao, Narendra Taly, and PV
Vijay, CRC Press (Taylor & Francis Group), Boca Raton, FL, USA, 2007, 382 pp.

FRP Strengthening of RC Structures, Teng, J. G., Chen, J. F., Smith, S. T. and Lam, L. (authors),
John Wiley & Sons Ltd., West Sussex, England, 2002, 245 pp. (E-mail: cs-books@wiley.co.uk;

http://www.wiley.com).

Strengthening of Reinforced Concrete Structures using Externally Bonded FRP Composites in
Structural and Civil Engineering, L. C. Hallaway and M. B. Leeming (editors), Woodhead
Publishing Ltd., Cambridge England, 2001, 327 pp.

Service Life Estimation and Extension of Civil Engineering Structures, V. M. Karbhari, USA.

Concrete Structures Repair, Rehabilitation and Retrofitting, CBS Publisher, New Delhi 2017.

10. Durability Design of Concrete Structures, A. Sarja and E. Vesikari, CRC Press, RILEM Report 14.
COURSE PLAN

No.
1

12-20

Learning Objective

Introduction

Causes of
Deterioration and
Durability Aspects

Condition Survey and
Non-destructive
Evaluation

Topics to be Covered

An overview of present repair,
retrofitting, and strengthening practices,
Distress identification, and Repair
Management

Holistic models of deterioration of
Reinforced Cement Concrete (RCC)
structures in terms of capillary porosity,
air-voids, micro-cracks, macro-cracks,
Aggressive deteriorating chemical agents,
corrosion of reinforcing bars, Sulphate
attack, Alkali-silica reaction, Durability
aspects, Intrinsic and Extrinsic Causes and
Stages of Distress

Objectives, Preliminary — Inspection,
Planning stages, Visual Inspection, Field
and laboratory testing stages,
Consideration for Repair Strategy, NonDestructive Evaluation (NDE) Tests such
as Rebound Hammer Test, Ultra-sonic
Pulse Velocity (UPV) test, Penetration
Resistance (Windsor Probe & PNR) Test,
Pull-out test, Core Sampling and Testing,
Carbonation Test, Chloride Damage
Assessment, Structural
Integrity/Soundness Assessment using
Radiography , Impact Echo, and Dynamic
Tests, Interpretation, Evaluation of
Results Data

Reference
Chapter/Sec. #
(Book/Handbooks)

Chapter#1 (TB#1
&RB#22)

TB#1 (Ch. 2)

TB#1 (Ch.3)

 
Structural Health
Monitoring (SHM)

Structural Analysis and
Design of Existing and
Rehabilitated
Structures

Selection of Repair
Materials for Concrete

Rehabilitation and
Retrofitting Methods

Analysis and Design of
FRP and ECC External
Strengthening Systems

Introduction to _— structural health
monitoring, Classification of SHM,
Methodology, Sensor Technology, SHM
Testing Categories, SHM System Design,
Case Studies, Future of Structural Health
Monitoring, Detailed example on SHM of
The Golden Boy Statue mounted on the
Dome of Manitoba Legislature.

Reserve Strength, Analysis necessary to
identify critical sections, Active and
Passive Repairs, Modeling of Repaired
Composite Structures, Mechanical
Properties of Materials, Evaluation of

Damage Concrete/Reinforcements,

Service Loads due to Change of Building
Use, Evaluation of Building
Configuration, and Load Tests for Flexural
member

Materials for Repair such as Premixed
Cement Concrete, Mortars, Polymer
Modified Mortars and Concrete
(PMM/PMC), Epoxies and Epoxy Systems
including Epoxy Mortar and Concrete,
Fiber Reinforced Polymer Systems, Fabric
sheets, Engineered Cementitious
Composites, Ferrocement

Repair Options, Performance
Requirements, Repair Systems,
Shotcrete, Ferrocement, Plate Bonding,
Fiber Wrap, Section Enlargement, and
External FRP Strengthening and
Prestressing

FRP and ECC Strengthened Structural
Members such as Beams, Bridge Girders,
Masonry Structures, and Columns. Near
Surface Mounted FRP_ Strengthening,
Strengthening using Laminates, and
Seismic Retrofitting of Columns

RB# 1&3

TB#1 (Ch.4), TBH2
(Ch3)

TB#2 (Ch.3), TBH1
(Ch.5)

TB#2 (Ch.4 &5),
TB#1 (Ch.6)

TB#2 (Ch.5)

 
Analysis Design of RC Flexural and shear Design Approach for TB#2 (Ch.4 & 6)
Structures Reinforced FRP Reinforced RC Beams and FRP
with FRP Bars prestressed bridge girders, Reduction

Factors, Durability Based Design

Case Study Problems Case study problems on_ Externally | TB#2 (Ch. 4 &5)
Strengthened and Prestressed Systems | and TB#1 (Ch.9)
using Unbonded Tendons

 

Evaluation Scheme

EC Evaluation Weightage Date &Time
No. Component
1 Mid-Term Test 90 Min. 30 Partially
OB
2 Assignments Take 15
Home

Special Projects (Computer 25 To be announced
and Lab Oriented)
Comprehensive Viva-Voce
Examinations
~ on
OB

Teaching Method: Teaching of the subject will be made by combination of power-point
presentation. Necessary instructional materials (available and prepared by instructor) will also be
supplied for ready reference.

 
