BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

SECOND SEMESTER 2020-21
COURSE HANDOUT
Date: 16.01.2021

In addition to part I (General Handout for all courses appended to the Time table) this portion gives further
specific details regarding the course.

Course No : CHE F 243

Course Title: Materials Science and Engineering

Instructor-in-C harge: Krishna Etika

Tutorial Instructor(s) ; Priya C. Sande/S. Anil Kumar

Lecture TTh 4" Hour (11:00 A.M.) W 10" Hour (5:00 P.M)
Tutorial : F 1% Hour (08:00 A.M.)

1. Course Description:

Introduction on materials for engineering, structures of metals, ceramics and polymers; crystalline
structure imperfections; amorphous and semi crystalline materials (includes glasses, introduction to
polymers); Correlation of structure to properties and engineering functions (mechanical, chemical,
electrical, magnetic and optical); phase diagrams; Improving properties by controlled solidification,
diffusion or heat treatment; Failure analysis and non-destructive testing; Types of materials (includes
synthesis, fabrication and processing of materials): Polymers and composites, Environmental
degradation of materials (corrosion); Evolution of materials (functional materials, Biomimetic materials,
energy saving materials etc); Criteria for material selection

2. Scope and Objective of the C ourse:

This course will be focused on the necessity of the chemical engineering students to know and understand
about the materials used in industrial applications and develop a background in the general area of materials.
systematic review of the basic structures of inorganic solids (metallic, ceramics, and polymers) and
techniques to determine basic microstructures and phases will be done. Emphasis will be given on
structures-properties correlations, and applications in chemical industries. Advance materials and their
applications will be covered.

3. Text Book(s):
T1. Callister's Materials Sc & Engg, W.D. Callister & R. Balasubramaniam (Adapted), Wiley, 2nd.
ed., 2014.

4, Reference Books:
R1. Materials science and engineering by V. Raghavan, 5" edition, Prentice Hall of India, ISBN:
978-81-203-2455-8

R2. Materials science and engineering by Smith, Hashemi, and Prakash, 4" edition (2008), Tata
McGraw Hill education pvt. Limited, ISBN 10: 0-07-066717-9 or ISBN 13: 978-0-07-066717-4.

R3. The Science and Engineering of Materials by Askeland and Fulay, 6th Ed. Cengage Learning,
Indian reprint 2012, ISBN 9788131516416.

RA. Essentials to Materials Science and Engineering by Askeland and Phule, 2nd Ed. Cengage
Engineering, Indian reprint 2013, ISBN: 9788131520703

5. Course Plan:
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

.__ | Topics details to be C overed in Reference
At the end of the module,
the student will be able to
e Summarize the scope,
L1:; Why Study Materials Science objectives, and structure
and Engineering? Classification of of course
Materials Recognize the
Importance of materials
in chemical engineering
and related applications

 

 

M1:
Introduction to
Engineering
Materials,
properties,
application

L2: Unit cell, Crystallographic
M2: directions and planes. Point 4:9 4.-910 At the end of a as
Crystal Structures, | Coordinates, Crystallographic nt the student will be able to
Crystallographic | Directions, Crystallographic Planes e Distinguish between

Points, Directi crystalline and
omts, Vireculons, | 1,3: Single Crystals, Polycrystalline amorphous materials.

and Planes, Materials, Anisotropy, Crystal T1:3.1-3.10 jf Identify crystal

Crystalline and Structures, Noncrystalline Solids rr
Noncrystalline "y “lanes. direction and

Materials

   

T1. Exercise problems Iie 3

L4; FCC, BCC, HCP, Density
Computation, Closed pack crystal T1 4.1-4.9
structure, Polymorphosm &

At the end of the module,
the student will be able to
e Draw unit cells for SC,

Allotropy,
L5: Radius ratio rules, AX-Type, i aeedeneniaal
AmXp-Type, and AvByXp-Type T14.10- |, Com denser ai
Crystal Structures, Ceramic Density | 4.17 ti d ue
Computations, Silicate Ceramics and Meta’s ahd’ ceralllics
M3: Carbon. given their unit cell
Structures of dimensions
materials (Metals, e Predict the crystal
Ceramics and L 6: Polymer molecules, Molecular structure of namics
Polymers) Weight, Shape, Structure, and T1 13.1- Describe basic vol
y Configurations, Thermoplastic and 13.10 pee ees et
Thermosetting Polymers, T1 14.10- molecule structure
Copolymers, Crystallization, Melting, | 14.13 * Calculate number
and glass transition in polymers. average molecular

weights and degree of

T1413 polymerization for a
T 2: Exercise Problems 1A i specified polymer.
e Describe the working
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

principle of XRD &
Microscopic techniques
L7: Polymer crystallinity, Polymer work for Materials
crystals, polymer types T1 4.20, T1 Characterization
9.11-5.13 +

L8-9. : Determination of crystal notes

structure, Bragg’s Law, diffraction
technique, Optical and electron
microscopy, grain size determination

T3. Exercise problems T1: 4,5

L10: Vacancies and Self- At the end of the module,

Interstitials, Impurities in Solids, T1:5.1-5.10 | the student will be able to
Specification of Composition e Describe defects in crystal
structures of metals and
ceramics.
4. e Identify edge,screw and
Dipotno.20 dislocation type of defects
e Name various ionic point

defects in ceramics
T4. Exercise problems T1: 5

At the end of the module,

M5: Imperfections
in Solids,

Point Defects, L11-12: Dislocations—Linear
Miscellaneous Defects, Interfacial Defects, Bulk or
Imperfections Volume Defects, Atomic Vibrations

L12: Diffusion Mechanisms, Steady- the student will be able to
State Diffusion, e Describe the atomic
mechanism of diffusion in
M6: metallic, ionic and
Diffusion T1: 6.1-6.8 | polymeric materials
Steady and non- L 13-14: Nonsteady-State Diffusion, e Calculate the diffusion

coefficient for some
materials at a specified
temperature.

e Write Fick’s First and

T5. Exercise problems T1:5 Second Law for diffusion

L15: Concept of stress and strain, At the end of the module,

elastic deformation, plastic the student will be able to
; T1: 9.5-9.10

deformation, hardness, Viscoelastic TI.

deformation, Factors influencing e State Hooke’s

properties and mechanical properties e Perform basic
calculations on

Failure of L 16-17: Ductile and Brittle fracture, engineering stress strain
materials fracture mechanics, Impact facture diagram
testing, Fatigue and Creep Fracture. e Describe the mechanism
of fracture in engineering

T6. Exercise problems T1: 9, 11 materials and perform

steady diffusion Factors That Influence Diffusion,

Other Diffusion Paths

M7: Mechanical

 
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

basic calculations.
L 18: Fracture of polymers, Factors e Define creep and fatigue
that influence mechanical properties and the conditions under
of semi crystalline polymers, which they occur.
Deformation of Elastomers e Listthe factors
influencing mechanical
properties of materials.

L19: Characteristics of Dislocations , At the end of the module,
Slip Systems , Slip in Single Crystals the student will be able to
, Plastic Deformation of

Polycrystalline Materials ,

e Describe edge and scre
Deformation by Twinning a ge and screw

dislocation motion from

. oa: an atomic perspective
L 20-21; Strengthening by Grain Size ° Define slip system and

Reduction, Solid-Solution cite one example
Strengthening, Strain Hardening, 10.8-10.14 | @ Define and explain the
Recovery, Recrystallization, Grain phenomenon of strain

growth and Precipitation Hardening hardening in terms of
dislocations and strain

field interactions.

M 8: Dislocations
and Strengthening
Mechanisms

T7. Exercise problems T1: 10,14

L 22: Solubility Limit, Phases, At the end of the module,
Microstructure, Phase Equilibria, the student will be able to
One-Component (or Unary) Phase
Diagrams. Binary Isomorphous T1: 7.1-7.10
systems, Development of and locate various phase
Microstructure in Isomorphous regions in the diagram.
Alloys, Binary Eutectic Systems, e Identify phases present in
a binary phase diagrams

L. 23-24: Development of e Locate temperatures and
compositions of all

eutectic, eutectoid,

e Schematically sketch
simple phase diagrams

Microstructure in Eutectic Alloys,
Equilibrium Diagrams Having

M9:

peritectic and congruent
Intermediate Phases or Compounds, phase transformations

Eutectic and Peritectic Reactions, e Write reactions for all
The Gibbs Phase Rule, The Iron—Iron these transformations for
Carbide (Fe-Fe3C) Phase Diagram, either heating or cooling
Development of Microstructure in e Given the composition of

Phase Diagrams

an iron-carbon alloy,
identify whether the
alloy is hypo or hyper
eutectoid and compute

mass fraction of the
T8. Exercise problems : phases.
4

Iron—Carbon Alloys, The Influence of
Other Alloying Elements.

 
 

M 10:
Phase

Transformations

 

M11:
Composite
Materials

M12:
Electrical
properties

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani

Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

L25: Kinetics of phase
transformations, Metastable Vs
equilibrium states, Isothermal
Transformation Diagrams.

T1: 8.1-8.5

L 26-28: Continuous Cooling
transformations,
Mechanical behavior of Fe-C alloys,

tempered Martensite.

T1: 8.6-8.9

 

T9. Exercise problems

L 29: Particle Reinforced
Composites: Large-particle
composites, concrete, Portland
cement concrete, reinforced concrete,
Dispersion strengthened composites.

L 30-31: Fiber reinforced
composites: Influence of fiber length,
fiber orientation and fiber
concentration,

L32: Polymer Matrix Composites,
Metal Matrix Composites, Ceramic
Matrix Composites,

L33: Carbon-carbon composites
Hybrid Composites and Structural
composites: Laminar composites,
sandwich panels, nanocomposites.

T9. Exercise problems

L 34: Electrical conduction, ohms
law, energy band structure in solids
Dielectric behavior

L35: Semiconductivity, Electrical
conduction in ionic ceramics and in
polymers, 17

T1:17.10:17

At the end of the module,
the student will be able to

e Make a schematic
fraction transformation
Vs logarithm of time plot
for a typical solid-solid
transformation and cite
the equation that
describes this behavior

e Design a heat treatment
that will produce a
Specified microstructure
for a given isothermal
transformation diagram.

 

At the end of the module,
the student will be able to

e Name the three main
divisions of composite
materials, and cite the
distinguishing feature of
each.

e Calculate longitudinal
modulus and longitudinal
strength for an aligned
and continuous fibrous
composites.

e Cite the desirable
features of metal matrix
and ceramic matrix
composites.

e Name and briefly
describe the two sub
classifications of
structural composites.

At the end of the module,
the student will be able to

e Describe band structure
of solid materials

e Calculate electrical
conductivity of metals,
seminconductors and
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

L36: Dielectric behavior of materials | T1: 17:18- insulators
17.23 e Define dielectric constant
T10. Exercise problems T1: 17 in terms of permittivities.

At the end of the module,
the student will be able to

 

L37: Basic Concepts, Origin of
magnetism in materials, Dia and
M13: Paramagnetic materials,
Magnetic Ferromagnetic materials.
Properties of
Materials

e Explain the nature and
source of magnetism in
materials

138-39: A ntiferromagnetic materials, ° hoa = |
Ferrimagnetic materials, Domains : nn ee
and hysteresis, soft and hard way some matenais may
magnetic materials, become permanent

magnets.
T11. Exercise problems T1: 18
At the end of the module,
the student will be able to

M14: L40: Heat capacity, thermal
Thermal expansion, thermal conductivity,
Properties of thermal stresses,

Materials

e Explain the nature of
optical interactions of
materials.

e Define heat capcity and
thermal conductivity of

T 12. Exercise problems T1: 19 materials

At the end of the module,
HOME . , , the student will be able to
Automotive Valve Spring, Materials os
Vatortale Gelection Selection for a Torsionally Stressed ene the oe i ne
nes Cylindrical Shaft, Artificial Total Hip se Roa. ae ovo
Consi a oerfame Replacement, Materials for Integrated | CD 22,T1 | custal applications
Circuit Packages, Corrosion of 16 using materials

vor oson ane Metals, Corrosion of Ceramics, peromance MnGex. ae
grat Degradation of Polymers Se an
Materials the corrosion aspects of
materials

 

6. Evaluation Scheme:

(min) (Marks) (Close Book/ Open Book)
/Mid-SemesterTest =| — 90 | 90S ||_—S<TEST 11>
1

Assignment?

 

3
3
Total (Marks)

#A ssignment will be take home and details of it will be announced in the class.
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

 

7. Online Consultation Hour: Friday 3-4 p.m.

8. Notices: The notices will be displayed on the Chemical Engineering Group notice board and/or Nalanda
and/or emailed to your official BITS e-mail account only.

9. Make-up Policy: Make-up will be granted for genuine cases only. In the case of medical issues,
certificate from authenticated doctor of the Birla Medical Center must accompany make-up application (only
prescription or vouchers for medicines will not be sufficient). Prior permission of IC is compulsory for nonemergency cases.

e Due to the surprise nature of the Quizzes, no make-up will be granted for these.

10. Note (if any): The material/lecture slides (if any) provided to the students registered in this course is
for academic purpose only and is considered intellectual property of BITS Pilani. These materials should
not be uploaded to any external websites/forums without the permission of the Instructor.

Krishna Etika
Instructor-in-charge
Course No. CHE F243
