Cy
Loy

" i BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
>= Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

SECOND SEMESTER 2020-2021
C ourse Handout (Part II)
Date: 18/01/2021

In addition to Part I (General Handout for all courses appended to the Time Table), this portion
gives further specific details regarding the course.

Course No. : CHE F241

Course Title : Heat Transfer

Instructor-in-C harge : BANASRI ROY

Instructors (Tutorial) SOMAK CHATTERJEE, SRINIVAS APPARI

1. Course Description

Steady state and unsteady state conduction, Fourier’s law, Concepts of resistance to heat transfer and
the heat transfer coefficient. Heat transfer in Cartesian, cylindrical and spherical coordinate systems,
Insulation, critical radius, Convective heat transfer in laminar and turbulent boundary layers, Theories
of heat transfer and analogy between momentum and heat transfer, Heat transfer by natural
convection, Boiling and condensation, Radiation, Heat exchangers: LMTD, epsilon-NTU method,
Co-current counter-current and cross flows,

NTU — epsilon method for heat exchangers.

2. Scope & Objectives

After completion of this course the students are expected to:

e Estimate the rate of heat transfer for one dimensional steady state systems involving temperature
gradient

e Define (both conceptually and mathematically) fundamental mechanisms of three heat transfer
modes; Conduction, Convection (free and forced both), and radiation.

e Apply these three mechanisms of heat transfer in solving practically relevant chemical
engineering problems; single phase and with phase change (boiling and condensation)

e Perform basic calculations related to the dependence of heat transfer coefficient on various
physical and fluid property parameters theoretically and empirically for; free convection, forced
convection, and boiling & condensation.

e Recognize and explain the construction and working principle of the various types of heat
exchangers

e Apply the Kern’s method to perform the process design of the new shell and tube heat exchangers

e Apply epsilon- NTU method to carry out the process design of the existing heat exchanger

e Recognize and explain the construction and working principle of the various types of evaporators

3. Prescribed Textbook (T)

Holman, J.P., Bhattacharyya, S. (2011), “Heat Transfer”, 10th Ed., Tata McGraw Hill Education
Pvt Ltd, New Delhi.

4, Reference Books

R1 :Sinnot, R.K. (2003), “Coulson & Richardson's chemical engineering vol 6”, 3™ edition,
Butterworth Heinemann, Oxford.
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

 

R2 :Mccabe, W.L., Smith, J.C., Harriott, P. (2005), “Unit operations of chemical engineering”, pi
edition, McGraw Hill Intemational Edition, Singapore.

9. Course Plan
Module Topics to be C overed in Reference Learning Outcomes
Number Lecture (L) Ch./Sec. (students be able:)
and Title
1. Basics of | L1. Introduction to conductive, | T:1.1-1.4 | To define basic mechanisms of
heat transfer | convective and radiative heat heat transfer
transfer e To develop the generalized
Development
2. One L3. Application of Fourier’s law | T:2.1—2.3 |e To apply the Fourier’s law of
dimensional | in simple systems and thermal heat conduction in plane wall,
steady state | resistance formulation cylindrical and spherical

conduction | L4. Application of Fourier’s law | T: 2.4 — systems to calculate the heat
in cylindrical and spherical , loss in each case
systems and thermal resistance To calculate the critical
formulation thickness of insulation for

L5. Critical thickness of insulated pipe and spherical
insulation for cylindrical and tank

spherical systems To analyze the temperature
L6. Temperature distribution in distribution in systems with
plane wall and cylindrical heat source and in systems
system with heat source having fin

T
2.

L7. Temperature distributionin | T: 2.9 To calculate the heat loss,

a fin and fin efficiency & its 2. efficiency and effectiveness of
T

effectiveness fin

L8.Thermal contact resistance

unsteady —_/ 1.10. Heat flow in infinite plate | T: 4.1, 4.3 | ¢ lumped heat capacity approach

state and in semi-infinite solid e analytical solution of semi
conduction [711 7 emperature distribution infinite wall/cylinder & sphere

and heat loss calculation using (Heisler charts)

T
Heisler charts a“
4. Principles To develop the relation of
of on a flat plate e Boundary layer thickness with
convection Reynolds number for laminar
Boundary Layer

flow over a flat plate

L14. Thermal boundary layer on | T:5.6 e Heat transfer coefficient with
coefficient number for laminar/turbulent
L15. Analogy: fluid friction and |T:5.7—5.8| ‘low overa flat plate and in a
heat transfer and its application tube

to turbulent heat transfer

: 2.6

; ,

7 :

» 2.1
3. One L9. Lumped heat capacity T: 4.2 To analyze the temperature
dimensional | System variation with time using

:4,4

5.4

one)

 
 
  
 

Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani

L16 Heat transfer in tube flow T: 5.10laminar and turbulent flow 5.11

9. Empirical | L17. Empirical relations for pipe | T: 6.2
and and tube flow
practical 18. Empirical relations for flow | T: 6.3
relations for | across cylinders and spheres
forced . L19. Empirical relations for flow | T:6.4
eee across tube banks

estimate heat transfer coefficient
L21. Free convection heat
transfer on a vertical flat plate
L22. Empirical relations for free
convection: planes, cylinders
and spheres
L23. Empirical relations for free
convection: enclosed spaces &
combine free and forced
convection
L24. Condensation heat transfer
phenomena & condensation
number
L25. Film condensation inside
horizontal tubes and introduction
to boiling heat transfer

6. Natural
convection

7.Condensat
ion and
Boiling

empirical relations 9.6

L27. Introduction, LMTD and T:10.1L28. Overall heat transfer
coefficient and types of heat 10.5
exchangers

L29. General design R1:12.5L30. Example Problem: Kern’s | R1:12.5
8. Heat
exchangers

Effectiveness NTU method
heat transfer | radiation properties and ,
governing laws
relation amongst them 8.5
8.7

3

L35. Heat exchange radiation
network

To estimate the heat transfer
coefficient for a given system
using most appropriate empirical
equations available and compare

To estimate the heat transfer
coefficient for a given system
using different appropriate
empirical equation available and
compare

To estimate the heat transfer
coefficient and/or heat loss fora
given system involving phase
change using most appropriate
theoretical/empirical equation
and compare

To explain construction and
working principle of various
types of heat exchangers
Apply Kern’s' method to
perform the process design of
the new shell and tube heat
exchangers

Apply epsilon- NTU method to
carry out the process design of
the existing heat exchanger

e To estimate the rate of steady
State heat transfer between two
or more nonblack/black bodies
e To develop the radiation
resistance network and analyze
it using electrical analogy

 
 
  
  
  
    
  
       

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

L36. Radiation shields &
Radiation network for an
absorbing and transmitting
medium

and types of evaporator

LAO. Effect of boiling point R2: 16
elevation on multiple effect
operation and vapor

recompression

    
  

   

10.Evaporat
ion

   
  

To explain construction and

working principle of the
various types of evaporators

e To evaluate the performance of

evaporators in terms of the

capacity, economy and steam

consumption

  

  
    
   
  

 
 

  
  
  

6. Evaluation Scheme

Sl | Evaluation Component | Duration | Weightage
No. (EC) (Marks/ % )

| 1 |Midsemestertest_ | 90 min__| 90/30 — CB /OB

2 | Tutorial tests (TT) 75/25 During pune mara CB/OB
(5 best out of XX conducted) class. Surprise in
nature

Assignment (Aspen/Matlab ) pe 15/5%

es
[4 |Comprcensive examination |720min [12040 /«CBTOB

e Notes: CB= Closed book, OB= Open book

 

Important:

e Chamber consultation hour: [t will be announced in the class. Prior appointment via email or
discussion in class is encouraged.

e The notices, if any, concerning the course will be displayed on the Google Classroom/Nalanda
only.

e Make-up will be granted for genuine cases only. Proper certificate from authenticated doctor,
say from the BITS Medical Center, must accompany make-up application (only prescription or
vouchers for medicines will not be sufficient). Prior permission of IC is compulsory. No make-up
will be granted for the tutorial tests.

Instructor-in- charge
Heat Transfer | CHE F241
