BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

SECOND SEMESTER 2020-21
COURSE HANDOUT

 

Date: 18.01.2021

In addition to part I (General Handout for all courses appended to the Time table) this portion gives further
specific details regarding the course.

Course No : CHE F244

Course Title : Separation Process I
Instructor-in-C harge : SURESH GUPTA
Tutorial/Practical Instructors : Arkaprovo Ghosal, Anil Kumar

1. Course Description:

Molecular diffusion in fluids, Interphase mass transfer, mass transfer coefficient, Theories for interphase mass transfer,
overall mass transfer coefficient and correlations, mass transfer with chemical reaction, analogy between momentum,
heat and mass transfer, Absorption, Distillation including azeotropic and extractive distillation, Liquid-Liquid
extraction, Leaching, Equipment for absorption, distillation, extraction and leaching.

2. Scope and Objective of the C ourse:

This course deals with the basic knowledge of mass transfer fundamentals and separations by phase addition or creation.
The primary objective of this course is to encapsulate the important technical fundamentals for designing the mass
transfer equipments.

3. Text Book:
Seader, J.D., Henley, E.J., “Separation Process Principles,” 2™ Edition, W iley India Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi, 2006.

4, Reference Books:
R1. Treybal, R.E., “Mass Transfer Operations,” 3™ Ed. (International Edition), McGraw-Hill Book Company,
Singapore, 1980.
R2. Dutta, B. K., “Principles of Mass Transfer and Separation Processes,” Prentice-Hall of India Pvt. Ltd., New
Delhi, 2007.

5. Course Plan:

Module Lecture session/T utorial session References Learning outcomes

Introduction | Ll. Mechanism of — separation,| Ch.1(T1) |e Role of separation operations

to Separation by phase addition or creation, in the chemical and

separation Separation by barrier, Separation by biochemical industries.

processes solid agent, Separation by external field e What constitutes the separation
or gradient, component recoveries and of a mixture and how each of
product purities, Selection of feasible the five basic separation
separation processes. techniques works.

e Component material balances
around a separation operation
based on specifications of
component recovery

e (split ratios or split fractions)
and/or product purity.

e Concept of key components
and separation factor to

 
 

Mass
transfer and
diffusion

Absorption
and
Stripping of
dilute
mixtures

 

Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

L2-L10. Molecular diffusion, Diffusion
coefficients, One-dimensional
molecular diffusion through stationary
media, Molecular diffusion in laminar
flow, Two-film theory and overall mass
transfer coefficients.

L11-L20. Equipment, General design
considerations, Graphical equilibrium
stage method for tray towers, Algebraic
method for determining the number of
equilibrium stages, Stage efficiency,
Rate-based method for packed columns,
Efficiency of packed columns.

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani

measure separation between
two key components.

Relationship between mass
transfer and phase equilibrium,
and why models for both are
useful.

Mechanisms of mass transfer,
including bulk flow.

Fick’s law of diffusion for
binary mixtures and discuss its
analogy to Fourier’s law of
heat conduction.

Diffusivities for gas, liquid,
and solid mixtures.

Rates of mass transfer by
molecular diffusion in laminar
flow for three common cases.
Mass-transfer coefficient and
explain its analogy to the heattransfer coefficient.

Rates of mass transfer across
fluid—fluid interfaces using
two-film theory and
penetration theory.
Differences among physical
absorption, chemical
absorption, and stripping.
Different types of trays.
Difference between random
and structured packings and
cite examples of each.
Estimation of minimum MSA
flow rate to achieve a specified
key-component recovery.
Graphically, estimation of the
required number of equilibrium
stages in a countercurrent
cascade

Overall stage efficiency
Operation problems in tray
columns.

Understand the height
equivalent to a theoretical
(equilibrium) stage or plate
(HETP or HETS)

Estimation of packed height,
and packed-column diameter.

 
Distillation
of binary
mixtures

LiquidLiquid
extraction

with ternary
systems

Leaching
and washing

 

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani

Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

L21-L32. Equipment and_ design
considerations, McCabe-T hiele
graphical equilibrium stage method for
tray towers, Estimation of stage
efficiency, Diameter of tray towers and
reflux drums, Rate-based method for
packed columns, Ponchon-Savarit
graphical equilibrium stage method for
tray towers.

L33-L37. Temary liquid-liquid systems,
Equipment, General design
considerations, Hunter-Nash graphical
equilibrium-stage method, MaloneySchubert graphical equilibrium stage
method.

L38-L40. Equilibrium-stage model for
leaching and washing, Rate-based
model for leaching, Equipment for
leaching.

;

.7(T
.8(T

1)

Ch. 16 (T1)

Need in distillation fora
condenser to produce reflux
and a reboiler to produce
boilup.

Five possible phase conditions
of the feed.

McCabe—Thiele method for
determining minimum reflux
ratio, minimum equilibrium
stages, number of stages
Murphree vapor-stage
efficiency to determine the
number of actual stages
(plates) from the number of
equilibriumstages.

Why and when liquid—liquid
extraction might be preferred
to distillation.

Selection of equipment for
liquid-liquid extraction.
Distribution coefficient and its
relationship to activity
coefficients and selectivity of a
solute

between carrier and solvent.
Use of a triangular diagram to
estimate minimum

solvent requirement, and
equilibrium stages for ternary
liquid—liquid extraction in a
cascade.

Equipment used for batch and
continuous leaching.
Differences between leaching,
washing, and expression.
Calculation for the recovery of
a solute for a continuous,
countercurrent leaching and
washing system.

No. of stages for the
continuous counter-current
leaching operation for the
design recovery of solute.

 
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

 

6. Evaluation Scheme:

(% ) ———* lose ook Open Book)
courte [tm a
Examination
“Tutorials/ Supasetest [_——~+d| SP SSCSC~SSCSBIO

Asimeisy TB

$Four tutorials —_ 10 marks) will be conducted out of which best three tutorials will be considered for
final grading. During tutorial and surprise quizzes, the students will be asked to solve problems
(numerical/objective/multiple choice type) and submit the answer sheet to the instructor.

7. Chamber C onsultation Hour: To be announced in the class.

8. Notices:A 1] notices concerning this course will be displayed in IntraBITS Portal and on the Chemical Engineering
Notice Board.

9, Make-up Policy:
Make-up is granted only for genuine cases with valid justification and prior permission of Instructor- in-charge.
10. Note (if any):

Instructor-in-charge
CHE F244
