BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani

Pilani Campus

AUGS/AGSR Division

SECOND SEMESTER 2020-2021
COURSE HANDOUT (PART II)

 

Date: 18.1.2021

In addition to Part I (General Handout for all courses appended to the Time Table), this portion
gives further specific details regarding the course.

Course No. : CHE F414
Course Title : Transport Phenomena
Instructor In-charge : BHANU VARDHAN REDDY KUNCHARAM

1. Course Description
Analogy for momentum, heat and mass transport; shell balance approach for analysis of individual
and simultaneous momentum, heat and mass transport; hydrodynamic and thermal boundary layers;
velocity, temperature and concentration distributions in turbulent flow; interphase transport for
isothermal and non-isothermal systems.
2. Scope and Objectives
e The primary objective of the course is to develop an understanding of a unified approach to study
three closely related topics: fluid dynamics, heat transfer, and mass transfer. Also, analyze the
analogy in these three transport mechanisms in terms of governing laws.
e The scope of the course is to represent the process behavior mathematically by applying the
following transport phenomena fundamentals:
o Apply the shell balance (mass, momentum and energy) to develop a system of
partial/ordinary differential equations.
o Find the required boundary conditions based on the understanding of the physics of the
system.
O Solve governing equations to find velocity/concentration/temperature/pressure profile
using appropriate analytical methods.
e Develop the equation of continuity and equation of change for mass, momentum and energy.
e Apply the equation of change to a real physical system and deduce the governing equation by
eliminating few terms representing phenomena not occurring in the process.
e Familiarize with computational tools (CFD) available to solve transport phenomena problems.
3. Prescribed Text Book

T.1 Bird, R. B., Stewart, W. E., & Lightfoot, E. N. (2007). Transport phenomena. John Wiley &
Sons, 2™ Edition
4, Reference Books

R.1 Fox and McDonald, ‘Introduction to fluid dynamics,’ John Wiley & Sons, 2008, 7" Ed.

R.2. Holman, J.P., ‘Heat transfer’, McGraw Hill, 1997, 8th edition

R.3. McCabe, W. L., Smith, J. C., & Harriott, P. Unit operations of chemical engineering,
McGraw-Hill, 7" Edition

 

Save Paper.
aS) Save Trees.
— fg... £ © Save the World.

Please Consider Your Environmental Responsibilities
Do Not Print Unless Necessary
 

3.

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani

Pilani Campus
AUGS/AGSR Division

5. Course Plan

Module Lecture session Reference | Learning Outcomes

1.

Basics of L1. Introduction to transport phenomena | T1:0.1-0.4 Revise the basics of

Momentum heat, mass and
momentum transport and
Transport

their governing laws

L2. Mechanisms of momentum transport | T1: 1.1, 1.7 | Understand the various
mechanism of
momentum transport

L3. Generalization of Newton’s law of T1:1.2 Develop the generalized
viscosity form of Newton’s law of
viscosity
Shell Momentum _ | L4. Concepts of shell momentum T1:2.1-2.2 | To find the velocity
Balances and balance and boundary conditions profile in a laminar flow
. for various systems
Velocity L5. Example Problem: Flow through a T1:2.3

Distributions in circular tube
To apply the shell

Laminar Flow L6. Example Problem: Flow through an | T1:2.4 momentum balance and
annulus develop the governing

L7. Example Problem: Flow of two T1:2.5 equauon and find out
, oo, appropriate boundary
adjacent immiscible fluids conditions

L8. A pplication of shell momentum T1: Ex 2B3
balance on narrow slit system with and 2B4 To solve the resulting set
without moving wall of equation with

L9, Application of shell momentum T1: Ex 2B6 Seer a ma Ce
balance on flow of a film on outside 2B7 con aieions oundary
circular tube and annular flow with inner

cylinder moving axially

continuity and equation

Change for L11. Equation of Motion and types of T1:3.2-3.5 | of motion and develop
isothermal systems | derivatives the goveming equation
L12. Use of Equation of change to solve | T1:3.6 ane tie ea
flow problems “
L13. Dimensional analysis and velocity | T1:3.7

profile development in flow near rotating
sphere and cone and plate viscometer

Equation of L10. Equation of Continuity T1:3.1 To apply the equation of

To solve the resulting set
of equation with
appropriate analytical

; Save Paper.
Zs". Save Trees.
innovate achieve for \save the World.

Please Consider Your Environmental Responsibilities
Do Not Print Unless Necessary

 

 

 
 

4, Boundary layer
theory and velocity
distribution in
turbulent flow

Basic of Energy
Transport and
Temperature
Distributions in
Solids and
Laminar Flow

 

Pilani Campus
AUGS/AGSR Division

T1: Ex 3.6.5
and Ex 3.7.1

L16. Introduction to Boundary Layer T1: 4.4
theory
L17. Examples applying the Boundary T1; 4.4

Layer theory
T1: 5.1-5.2

T1: 5.3

L 14. Velocity profile development for
flow near rotating sphere and creeping
flow around a sphere

L 15. Demonstration of numerical tools
(ANSYS, Matlab) to analyze
momentum flow problems.

L18. Basics of turbulent flow and
Reynolds decomposition and timesmoothed equation of change for
incompressible fluids

L19. Time smoothed velocity profile
near a wall

L22. Temperature distributions in Solids:

L20. Mechanisms of Energy Transport T1: 9.1,9.7,
9.8,

L21. Concepts of Shell Energy balance | T1: 10.1

and boundary conditions

Heat conduction with electrical heat

source
L23. Temperature distributions in Solids: | T1: 10.3
Heat conduction with nuclear heat source
L24. Temperature distribution in solids | T1: 10.4
with viscous heat source

L25. Temperature distribution in a T1: 10.7
cooling fin

L 26. Forced Convection T1: 10.8

L27. Free convection T1: 10.9

Please Consider Your Environmental Responsibilities
Do Not Print Unless Necessary

 

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani

method and boundary
conditions and develop
velocity profile

To familiarize with
numerical tools to solve
transport phenomena
(momentum flow)
problems.

To understand the
Boundary Layer theory
and its application to
flow problems.

To develop the model
for the turbulent flow
system using Reynolds
decomposition
phenomena

To apply the time
smoothed equation of
change and develop the
velocity profile for
turbulent system

To find the temperature
profile in solid and ina

laminar flow for various
systems

To apply the shell
energy balance and
develop the governing
equation and find out
appropriate boundary
conditions

To solve the resulting set
of equation with
appropriate analytical
method and boundary
conditions

 

Save Paper.

WA se Trees.

£ > -ASave the World.
Pilani Campus
AUGS/AGSR Division

 

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani

L28. Example Problems: Forced T1: 10B.7
convection heat transfer in parallel plates

6. Equation of
change for nonisothermal systems

L29. Development of Energy Equation T1: 11.111.3

L30. Use of Equations of change of T1:11.4.1
energy to solve steady state problems:
Laminar flow in circular tube

L31. Use of Equations of change of T1:11.4.2
energy to solve steady state problems:
Tangential flow in annulus with viscous

heat generation

L32. Use of Equations of change of T1:11.4.3
energy to solve steady state problems:

Transpiration cooling

L33. Use of Equations of change of T1: 11.4.5
energy to solve steady state problems:
Free convection heat transfer from a

vertical plate

L34, Dimensional analysis of the
equation of change for non-isothermal
system

L35. Demonstration of numerical tools
(ANSYS, Matlab) to analyze Energy
transport and non-isothermal systems.

TI:
17.1,17.7,
17.8,17.9

L37. Shell Mass Balance and Boundary | T1: 18.1
conditions

L38. Diffusion with a stagnant film T1: 18.2

L39. Diffusion with
heterogeneous/homogeneous chemical
reaction

_ Basics of Mass L36. Mechanics of Mass Transport

Transport, Shell
Balance and
Equation of
Change for multicomponent system

L40. Diffusion into a falling liquid film
and diffusion and chemical reaction
inside a porous catalyst

 

Please Consider Your Environmental Responsibilities
Do Not Print Unless Necessary

 

B

To apply the equation of
change of energy and
equation of motion and
develop the governing
equation and find out
appropriate boundary
conditions

To solve the resulting set
of equation with
appropriate analytical
method and boundary
conditions and develop
temperature profile

To familiarize with
numerical tools to solve
energy transport
problems and nonisothermal systems.

To find the
concentration profile in
stagnant and in a laminar
flow for various systems

To apply the shell mass
balance and develop the
governing equation and
find out appropriate
boundary conditions

To solve the resulting set
of equation with

 

Save Paper.
Save Trees.
Save the World.
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani

Pilani Campus
AUGS/AGSR Division

L41. Equation of Change for multi T1: 19.1 appropriate analytical
component system method and boundary
L42.S f mul T1:19.2 conditions,
. tl t :19.
3 aon of cham me Comps To familiarize with
q g numerical/CFD tools

L 43, Illustration of diffusion and available to solve mass
reaction in a porous catalyst using transport (diffusion and
CFD software. reaction In porous

 

media).

 

Overall C ourse Learning Outcomes:

1. Identify and develop analogy between momentum, mass and heat transport phenomena.

2. Write shell balances for 1D momentum, heat and mass transport problems,

3. Develop ordinary and partial differential equations from the shell balances and identify
the boundary conditions to solve the ODEs and PDEs.

4. Develop continuity, equation of change for isothermal and non-isothermal systems for
momentum, heat and mass transport problems.

9. Apply equation of change to real systems and develop the governing equation by
eliminating terms that are not necessary or negligible.

6. Use CFD software to solve transport phenomena problems and appreciate the know-how
behind the CFD.

6. Evaluation Scheme:

Evaluation Duration Weightage Date & Time Remarks
Component (% )

1. Mid Semester Test 90 min Open Book
, 5

Semester
Semester
Design Project and
4. Seminar using CFD ae ‘ene Open Book/Take Home
Semester
software
Exam

Closed Book Test:

Assignments (2)

 

No reference material of any kind will be permitted inside the exam hall.

Save Paper.
aS) Save Trees.
— fg... £ © Save the World.

Please Consider Your Environmental Responsibilities
Do Not Print Unless Necessary

 
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani

Pilani Campus

AUGS/AGSR Division
Open Book Exam:

 

Use of any printed/written reference material (books and notebooks) will be permitted
inside the exam hall. Loose sheets of paper will not be permitted. Computers or electronic
devices of any kind will not be allowed inside the exam hall. Use of calculators will be
allowed in all exams. No exchange of any material will be allowed.

7. Chamber C onsultation Hours:
TBA
8. Notices:

All announcements, notices will be posted on the Nalanda portal or Google Classroom
only.

9, Make-up Policy:

Make-up is granted only for genuine cases with valid justification and prior permission of
the Instructor-in-charge. Certificate from authenticated doctor, say from the Medical
Center, must accompany make-up application (only prescription or vouchers for medicines
will not be sufficient). Prior permission from IC, barring emergencies, is mandatory. There

is no makeup for Project, Assignment, and surprise quiz/discussion components.
10. Note:

Any changes made to the above handout will be notified earlier in the class.

(BHANU VARDHAN REDDY KUNCHARAM)

Instructor-In-C harge
CHE F414

 

Save Paper.
age Save Trees.
innovate Se lead for Asave the World.

Please Consider Your Environmental Responsibilities
Do Not Print Unless Necessary
