BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

SECOND SEMESTER 2020-21
COURSE HANDOUT
Date: 16.01.2021

In addition to part I (General Handout for all courses appended to the Time table) this portion gives further
specific details regarding the course.

Course No : CHE F343

Course Title : Process Design Principle II

Instructor-in-C harge : DR. PRADIPTA CHATTOPADHYAY
Instructor(s) : Dr. Pradipta C hattopadhyay, Linisha Biswal

Tutorial/Practical Instructors: Dr. Pradipta Chattopadhyay, Linisha Biswal

1. Course Description: Review of process synthesis, Design and sizing of equipment of heat exchangers,
separation towers, pumps etc. Cost accounting and capital cost estimation, Annual costs, earings and
profitability analysis, optimization of process flow sheets. Steps involved in designing configured industrial
systems like solar desalinators, fuel cells, hand warmers, etc.

2. Scope and Objective of the Course: The aim of the course is to provide fundamental knowledge of design
aspects and economic analysis as applicable to Chemical Engineering processes. The main focus is on the
concepts of process design with emphasis on cost estimation, profitability analysis, actual design of important
equipments for Chemical Engineers.

3. Text Books:

T1W.D. Seider, J.D. Seader & D.R. Lewin, “Product & Process Design Principles’, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,
2™ ed., 2004.

4, Reference Books:

R1 M.S. Peters, K.D. Timmerhaus & R.E. West, Plant Design and Economics for Chemical Engineers,
McGraw- Hill, 5th Edition, 2011.

R2 Coulson & Richardson, Chemical Engineering Design, Pergamon Press, Volume 6, 2nd edition, 1993.
R3 Aspentech online portal

R4 Chafik E., Design of plants for solar desalination using the multi-stage heating/humidifying technique,
Desalination 168 (2004) 55-71.

R5 Luna-Sandoval G., et al., Hydrogen Fuel Cell Design And Manufacturing Process used for Public
Transportation in Mexico City, Proceedings of WCE 2011, July 6-8, 2011, London, U.K.

R6 S.B. Thakore & B.I. Bhatt, Introduction to Process Engineering and Design, Mcgraw Hill Education (India)
Pvt. Ltd., ISBN: 978-0-07-063415-2.
 

5. Course Plan:

1-Overview/Case
Studies on Latest
Developments

2- Concepts
related to
Economics

3-Detailed Design

1.1-1.6 Introduction, Important
aspects of process design, Basic
Process Equipment, Materials of
Construction, Corrosion and its
prevention, Review of process flow
Sheets, Optimization of process flow
sheets-principles, Case studies
pertaining to design of configured
industrial systems like solar
desalinators, fuel cells, Discussion on
air coolers, fired heaters

2.1-2.2 Fixed capital, working capital,
equipment cost, estimation of
equipment cost by scaling, total
product cost

2.3-2.4 Types of interest, compound
interest, present worth and discount,
annuities, perpetuities and capitalized
costs

2.9-2.7 Depreciation, types of
depreciation, salvage value, present
value, methods for determining
depreciation

2.8-2.13 Methods for profitability
evaluation, alternative investments

3.1- 3.21 Heat exchanger types, basic
design procedure, shell and tube
exchangers, tubes and tube
arrangements, LMTD, methodology
for design of pumps and piping, power
required for blower and adiabatic
compressor, process design of orifice
meter, rotameter, Study of a sieve tray
tower desig

Ch. 1, Ch. 3T1, R3, R4, Ro

Ch. 12, R2, Ch.
0-6-R6, Ch. 8
R6, Ch. 13-15
T1

 

 

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

Reference | Learning outcomes

Understanding the
general design
procedure, Case studies
on important
developments in process
design

Understanding the
important concepts of
cost estimation

Learning the various
concepts of interest,
investment cost

Learning the important
concepts of depreciation

Understanding the
various aspects of
profitability, alternative
investments

Learning the important
concepts of basic heat
exchanger design,
process design of
piping, pumps, orifice
meter, rotameter,
separation tower
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

 

6. Evaluation Scheme:

Component Duration | Weightage Date & Time Nature of component
(% ) (Close Book/ Open Book)
Mid-Semester Test To be announced later OB

Comprehensive 120 mins AQ To be announced later OB
Examination

Tutorial Tests * During Tutorial Session OB
each

* Fight Tutorial Tests will be conducted (best 6 will be considered).

 

7. Chamber Consultation Hour: To be announced in the class.

8. Notices: Notice will be displayed in Google Classroom/BITS email of student as necessary.
9, Make-up Policy:

A. Make up exam for Mid-sem and Comprehensive exam will be granted for genuine cases only.
Prior permission of IC is compulsory.
B. No Make up will be granted for any Tutorial Test missed.

10. Note (if any): None

Instructor-in-charge
Course No. CHE F343
