BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

SECOND SEMESTER 2020-2021
COURSE HANDOUT
Date: 16.01.2021
In addition to part I (General Handout for all courses appended to the Time table) this portion gives further
specific details regarding the course.

Course No : CHE F419
Course Title : CHEMICAL PROCESS TECHNOLOGY
Instructor-in-C harge : SMITA RAGHUVANSHI

1. Course Description:

Process synthesis concepts for flow sheet generation - Unit operations and unit processes, General principles
applied in studying a chemical industry; Chemical processes based on agricultural and raw materials - sugar,
starch, alcohol, cellulose, etc; Selected technologies for chemicals from inorganic chemical industry covering
contact process, fertilizer, chloral alkali, cement and lime; Natural product industry covering manufacture of
oils, soaps, detergents, paper and pulp, Coal and various coal-chemicals, Petroleum and petrochemical
products, Raw materials and principles involved in the production of olefins and aromatics, Acetylene,
Butadiene and typical intermediates from olefins and aromatics such as ethylene glycol, ethyl benzene, phenol,
cumene and DMT/PTA, Dyes and pharmaceuticals.

2. Scope and Objective of the C ourse:

The aim of the course is to bring alive the concepts forming the basis of the Chemical Process Industry and to
give a solid background for innovative processes. The main focus would be on the raw materials, development
of flow sheets, synthesis and detailed analysis of the processes. The course begins with the coverage of refinery
based operations, followed by steam reforming process and syn gas production based processes. The course also
introduces various development in homogeneous & heterogeneous catalyst based processes. The portion covers
process intensification & other process development. The course also deals with few traditional processes such
as sulphuric acid production, nitric acid production and various other processes. It enables the students to
integrate the fundamental knowledge learnt in other courses and apply the same in various application based
processes. It helps them to apply this knowledge and understanding in the industrial processes.

3. Text Books:
TB: "Moulijn A J., Makkee, M., Diepen, A V., "Chemical Process Technology, 2nd Edition" Wiley, 2013.

4, Reference Books:

R1: Rao M G., Sittig M., "Dryden’s Outlines of Chemical Technology for the 21st Century", East W est Press,
3rd Ed., 1997.

R2: Austin G T., Shreve R.N., "Shreve’s Chemical Process Industries", McGraw Hill, 5th Ed., 1984.

R3: Research Papers from Refereed Journals / Resources- Chemical Engg World, Chemical Industry Digest,
Chemical Weekly, etc.

R4:; Dynamic addition of reference material will be shared.
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

 

5. Course Plan:

Module Lecture session Reference Learning Outcomes
Number

1. Overview of L1.1 -1.2 To understand about chemical
the course; Introduction to the course, Chemical | Chi & Ch2T1 | industry and a detailed
A bout chemical Industries, Structure of chemical understanding of various
industry & Oil industry, Raw materials used processes
sector development resources
13 lectures L1.4 — 1.6 Oil refinery-an overview, Ch3- T1
Physical and Thermal Processes,

Catalytic Processes, Treatment of
refinery gas streams

L1.7 — 1.10 Cracking reactions, Ch4-T1
Kinetics involved, Industrial Process,
Product Processino

L1.11 — 1.13 Production of Syn gas,
coal gasification, purification and
adjustment of synthesis
2. Sulphuric | L 2.1 —2.3 Chamber process, Contact | ChIIA - R1, To understand the
acid process | process, Modern sulphuric acid Ch7-T1 chronological development in
3 lectures production Plant, Catalyst deactivation the sulfuric acid production
(Inorganic bulk chemicals)
3. Ammonia L3.1-L3.3 Ammonia oxidation Chil E- R1, To understand the
process processes: Mono Pressure and Mixed Ch7-T1 chronological development in
3 lectures pressure processes the Nitric acid production
ganic bulk chemicals)

 

 
   
 

4, Methanol L4.1-4.2 Methanol production process | Ch6- T1 To understand the production
of bulk chemicals and
synthetic fuels derived from

production
process
2 lectures
5. Catalysts | L5.1—5.3 To understand the concept To understand about
based processes of homogeneous catalysis Chi10-T1 homogeneous and
5 lectures L 5.4 —5.5 To understand the concept heterogeneous catalysts system
of heterogeneous catalysis

6. Catalytic L6.1 — 6.2 Introduction, Micro Ch14-T1 To understand the concept of
reactors reactors, Structured catalytic reactors intensification of process
2 lectures
7. L7.1 — 7.3 Conversion process, Ch13-T1 To understand the
Biotechnology fermentation technologies, enzyme biotechnology processes
based processes technolog}

fuels for conversion of biomass
8. Pulp & paper L 8.1 — 8.2 Kraft Process, sulfite Chill F, R1 To understand the pulp and
making process | Process, Mechanical Pulping; Paper paper production processes

 

 

2 lectures making, Production of lignin
chemicals

  
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

10. Cement L 10.1 Dry and wet cement Chilk, T1 To understand the cement
process manufacturing processes manufacturing processes
1 lecture
11. Scaled up L 11.1-11.2 Introduction, Pilot Chi5-T1 To finally conclude with
process plants/mini plants, scale up concepts overall process development
2 lectures

6. Evaluation Scheme:

 

 

Component Duration | Weightage Date & Time Nature of component |
(% ) (Close Book/ Open
Book)

Mid- Semester Test <TEST 1> OB

Comprehensive 3h 40 <TEST C> OB
Examination

Surprise quiz (Best 4 15 min During lecture hour (3 OB
out of 6) will be conducted
before mid-sem and 3
will be snectee after
mid-sem)
Seimae | leteu [mean |
(Two Assignments ) 5% +5% ) one after mid sem

7. Consultation Hour: Consultation hour will be decided while conducting the class.

  

8. Notices: All Notices would be put up on Google class room.

9, Make-up Policy:
Make-up will be granted for genuine cases only. Prior permission of IC is compulsory. No make up for class
based quiz component and assignments; if any.

10. Note (if any):
e Students have to adhere to the class timings and participate in the class room discussion.

Instructor-in-charge
Course No. CHE F419
