 

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

 

SECOND SEMESTER 2020-2021
Course Handout (Part II)
Date: 07/01/2021
In addition to Part I (General Handout for all courses appended to the time table) this portion
gives further specific details regarding the course.

Course No : CHE F266
Course Title : Study Project
Instructor-in-charge : BANASRI ROY

1. Scope and Objective of the course:

The course is specially designed to provide an opportunity to the students for development of
their academic skills and logical thinking through open ended study oriented activities. As a
part of education, this project course follows a method of learning and therefore, the student's
actual day-to-day task involvement would constitute the central thread of the learning
process. The evaluation will recognize this aspect by demanding day-to-day productivity and
punctuality of the student.

2. Plan of Work:

The plan of work for each student will be decided by the respective Instructors. Each student
should adhere to the plan of work decided for and should regularly monitor the progress of
the project accordingly.

3. Evaluation Scheme:

Project Outline & Plan of Work 10 21.01.2021
Regular Interaction 10
28.02.2021

i
i
2
[sna seminaranava |

 

 

 

Save Paper.
< ale Trees.
> “Save the World.

innovate

Please Do Not Print Unless Necessary
 

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

4. Mid-semester grading:
Mid-semester grading will be done after mid-semester seminar.

5. Grading Procedure:

In addition to what is mentioned in Part I of the handout, the grading will be done mainly on
the basis of the progress made towards attainment of the project objectives and_ will
recognize that each Instructor has given specific task situation in which the student
participates in a cognitive manner. Supervisor will evaluate 55% and rest 45% will be
conducted by a panel of examiners based on the presentation and overall performance of the student.
Final grade will be awarded on the basis of a histogram made for all the students of this particular
course.

6. General:

It is the student's responsibility to ensure:

Continuous interaction with the Instructor.

Work to the satisfaction of the Instructor.

Adherence to plan of work.

Evaluation(s) to be completed by the due date and evaluation marks are communicated
to the Instructor-in- charge by due date.

VVVV

7. Notices:
All notices pertaining to this course will be communicated by the _ respective
instructors/course co-ordinator by email.

8. Project Report
The project report shall be submitted to your Instructor.

Instructor-In-Charge
(CHE F266)

 

is Save Paper.
Ze Save Trees.
f= ‘Save the World.

innovate

Please Do Not Print Unless Necessary
