BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

SECOND SEMESTER 2020-21
COURSE HANDOUT

 

Date: 15.01.2021

In addition to part I (General Handout for all courses appended to the Timetable) this portion gives further
specific details regarding the course.

Course No : CHEM F242
Course Title : Chemical Experimentation I
Instructor-in-C harge : Indresh Kumar

Tutorial/Practical Instructors: Dalip Kumar, Ajay Kumar Sah, Bharti Khungar, Paritosh Shukla, Indresh
Kumar, Prachi Sharma, Gurpreet Kaur, Neha Meena, Narsimha, Dhananjay Shrinivas
Nipate, Monika Malik, Taur Prakash Pandurang, Prakriti Saraf, Pragya, Mamta, Nagare
Y adav Kacharu, Sushma Narwal, Bhawani, Narendra Dinkar K harat.

1. Course Description: This course is based on laboratory experiments in organic chemistry. This course is
available for second year M.Sc. Chemistry students.

2. Scope and Objective of the C ourse: The main objective of the course is to provide students with a firsthand
experience about basic techniques used in an organic chemistry laboratory. Broadly, the experiments include
qualitative organic analysis, detection of known and unknown functional groups, chemical separation of
mixture of two compounds, examples of single step and two-step organic syntheses, extraction of organic
compounds from natural sources or from drugs, chromatographic separation of pure compound from a mixture
obtained in a multistep reaction etc.

3. Textbooks: V ogel's Textbook of Practical Organic Chemistry, 5“ Ed.
4, Reference Books: Reference sources for each experiment will be specified, as necessary.

3. Course Plan: The students will perform several experiments in qualitative, synthetic organic chemistry including
single-step and multi-step synthesis, extraction of natural products, and training in chromatographic separation, with an
emphasis on individual planning and execution of the experiments. The students will be divided in two sections (I & II)
and each section will conduct a set of experiments (Lab I or Lab-II experiments) in the first half semester and thereafter
interchanging of the students will proceed during the second half of semester. Selected 22 experiments will be discussed
and performed in the class.

Experimental Detail Learning Outcomes
Lab-I Chemoselective reduction of organic ¢ Safe laboratory practices, handling
Experi- compound of glassware, equipment, and
ments: reagents.

Multicomponent reaction (Biginelli Reaction)
Synthesis ¢ Findings of limiting reagent and

extraction Coumarin synthesis using microwave percent yield of a single or a multi
estimation, and irradiation step synthesis.

urification : dw nk —— .
pu 4 Synthesis of benzilic acid from benzil using Understanding the eatiow
techniques rindina technique monitoring and product purification
J g q techniques like, distillation,

Multistep synthesis recrystallization, aqueous

 
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

Experiments’:

Qualitative
Analysis

Organic
Compounds

of

 

Cycloaddition reaction (Diels-Alder Reaction)
under heating or microwave conditions

Separation/purification of an organic

extraction, thin layer and column
chromatography.

¢ Utilization of characterization
techniques like mp, IR, NMR etc.

 

compound using column chromatography
¢ Understanding the mechanism of

Isolation of curcumin from curcuma longa ;
some simple organic reactions
Quantitative estimation of Amino acids » Proper documentation of
= — laboratory work
Nucleophilic Aromatic Substitution .

  

10
11

Elemental Analysis of Known organic
compounds (4 Compounds, common)

Functional group analysis of known compounds
(12 Compounds, common)

Non-nitrogenous functional groups: Alcohol,
Phenol, Aldehyde, Ketone, Alkene, Alkyne
(unsaturated compounds), Carbohydrate,
Carboxylic acid and Ester

Nitrogenous functional groups: Amine, Amide,
Nitroaromatics

Complete analysis (Elemental analysis &
functional group determination) of unknown
compounds, & mp determination (min. of two
compounds by each student)

Separation of mixture by Separation TechniqueI: A mixture of water-soluble component and
water-insoluble component will be separated by
water, and identification of residue by elemental
& functional group analysis (one mixture to each
student)

~~

Hq KO
1 1 1 —
CO O1 CO

Separation of mixture by Separation TechniqueII & Technique-III: A mixture of acidic/basic and
neutral components will be separated and
identification of acidic/basic and _ neutral
components by elemental and functional group
analysis (two different type of mixtures to each
student)

¢ Safe laboratory practices, handling
of glassware, equipment, and
reagents.

¢ Preliminary observation of general
physical characteristics of organic
compounds

Understanding of the organic
compounds chemical separation and
purification techniques _like,
distillation, extraction etc.

¢ Leaming of elements and

functional group analysis.

¢ Utilization of characterization
techniques like mp, IR and NMR

¢ Proper documentation of
laboratory work

 
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

Separation of mixture by Separation TechniqueIV: A mixture of acid and base components will
be separated and their analysis (elemental and
functional group) will be performed (one mixture
to each student)

Separation of mixture by Separation TechniqueV: A mixture of solid/liquid or liquid/liquid will
be separated and detailed analysis of both the
components will be performed via elemental and
functional group analysis (one mixture to each
student)

Separation of unknown mixture: Practice-I

“In qualitative analysis of compounds/mixtures, NMR and IR will be provided to characterize the compounds.

 

6. Evaluation Scheme:

[Component | Weeightage(%) | Date&Time |

 

6a. Marks Distribution: Each Lab experiment will be of 8 Marks.

Distribution of Marks are as follows:

Lab-I Experiments: Attendance (1); Lab quiz (2); Other evaluation component (5).
Lab-II Experiments: A ttendance (1); Lab quiz (3); Other evaluation component (4).
7. Notices: All notices concerning the course will be displayed on Nalanda.

8. Make-up Policy: There will be two buffers and therefore if a student misses two labs (for any reason), no
make-up will be considered.

Instructor-in-charge
CHEM F242
