 

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

SECOND SEMESTER 2018-2019
COURSE HANDOUT
Date: 16-01-2021

In addition to part I (General handout for all courses appended to the timetable) this portion gives
further details regarding the course.

Course No. : CHEM F336
Course Title : Nanochemistry
Instructor-in-charge : INAMUR RAHAMAN LASKAR

1. Course Description: Introduction, importance of nanoscience, chemistry behind nano;
Instruments to be used for characterizing nanomaterials; Diversity in nanosystems: chemical aspects
of metallic, semiconducting nanomaterials, nanocomposites, carbon nanotubes and fullerenes, selfassembled monolayers, monolayer protected metal nanomaterials, core-shell nanomaterials;
Applications of nanomaterials in nanobiology, nanosensors and nanomedicines, hands on
experience in laboratory.

2. Course Objectives: This is an elective course for chemistry discipline. Throughout the
semester we will discuss the properties of nanomaterials and its dependence on shape, size,
and functional groups, which enable us to employ nanomaterials for device applications.
Applications are limited in the fields of biology, sensors, medicine, and machines.
However, in this course we will try to address the most important concepts and applications of
Nanochemistry in recent research.

By the end of the semester, you will be able to:
- Learn the importance and properties of nanomaterials
- Gain the idea of synthesis and characterization of nanomaterials
- Study semiconductor nanoparticles and nanocomposite materials
- Investigate different nano systems, carbon nanotube, fullerenes etc.
- Learn various application of nanomaterials in catalysis, biological, and device application
- Learning of laboratory techniques of central importance to explore the idea of nanosystem
e Synthesis of mono- and bimetallic nanoparticles
e Synthesis of magnetic (Fe304) nanoparticle
e Role of a stabilizer during the synthesis of nanoparticle

3. TextBook: T. Pradeep, Nano: The Essentials, Understanding Nanoscience and
Nanotechnology, Tata McGraw-Hill Publishing Company Limited, New Delhi, 2007.

4, Reference Book: (1) T. Pradeep, A Textbook of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, Tata
McGraw-Hill Publishing Company Limited, New Delhi, 2012.

(2) G. Cao and Y. Wang, Nanostructures and Nanomaterials: Synthesis, Properties, and

Save Paper.
gy. Save Trees.
>= Save the World. Es ee

Please Do Not Print Unless Necessary

 

 
 

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

Applications, 2nd edition, World Scientific Series in Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, Vol 2, 2011
(3) C. P. Poole Jr. and F. J. Owens, Introduction to Nanotechnology, Wiley Int. science 2003.
(4) Nanomaterials, B. Viswanathan Narosa Publishing House, New Delhi

9. Course plan:

Mod Lecture Session Topics to be covered Learning Refere
ve outcomes

Introduction Nano the beginning, concept, e Why nano? RI and
importance

e Historical

landmark in (Will

nanoscience and be

nanotechnology annou
nced
in the
class)

Metal nanoparticles: Syntheses, properties of monolayer |e Different T1 and
syntheses, and polymer capped metal methods to make Rl
characterization, and_ | nanoparticles, Mie theory, nanomaterials
properties controlling the size and (Will
composition of the metallic cores of | ® Principle be
nanoparticles, Anisotropic metal properties to annou
nanoparticle, Nanostructure: 2D explore need
array, 3D Superlattice, Bimetallic | nanomaterials in the

Ds class)
nanoparticles e Size and Shape
dependent
nanomaterials

e Core-shell and
alloy nanomaterials

Instruments for the Electron microscopes, Scanning e Identification of
characterization of probe microscope, X -ray objects in the nano
nanomaterials diffractometer domain

e Modern
advances in the
techniques to
characterize
nanomaterials

Save Paper.
, Save Trees.
£ = \Save the World. — fg _

Please Do Not Print Unless Necessary

 

 
 

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

semiconducting Quantum dots, Electronic structure, | e Discovered T1 and
nanoparticles: Semiconductor nanoparticle, properties of 1
Syntheses, properties, | Optical properties quantum dots and
and characterization quantum

confinement

e Optical,

photophysical,

 

photochemical, and
biological
properties of
quantum dots

R
Nanocomposite W hat are composite materials; e Development of | T1 and
materials Classification of nanocomposites: | supported R1
Nonpolymer based nanomaterials
R

nanocomposites; Polymer based

composites; Biocomposites e Stabilization of
nanoscale material

using polymer

Sell-assembled Monolayers on gold, patterning e Various kinds of | T1 and
monolayers monolayers, Langmuir Blodgett monolayers 1
films, Applications of films in

LED, Non-linear optical properties | ¢ Properties and
application in
nanotechnology

Carbon nanotubes syntheses, Structures, physical e Different T1 and
properties, Electronic properties, properties of Rl
Mechanical Properties and carbon nanotube

applications

e How to fill and

use of carbon

nanotube

Fullerenes Syntheses and purification, e Discovery of T1 and

Properties, Nanostructured fullerens and Rl
fullerene films, Applications in relation to the
electrocatalytic aspects and development of
photoelectrical conversion of light | nanoscience

energy
e Usual and

unusual properties
of fullerens

Save Paper.
gy. Save Trees.
** “Save the World. innovate achieve ~—siea

Please Do Not Print Unless Necessary

 

 
 

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

Nanoparticles in Introduction of nanoparticles in e Recent
catalysis catalysis, Methods of preparation of | advancement in
supported metal nanoparticles, nanoscience and
Applications of nanomaterials in nanotechnology in
various fields of catalysis, sensoric | catalysis,
and photoelectrochemical photocatalysis, and
applications sensoric application
36- | Nanoparticles in Colloidal gold bioconjugates, Metal | e Interaction T1 and
Al Biological and cluster conjugates, DNA and between Ri
biomimetic nanoparticles, DNA recognition, biomolecules and
applications Biomimetic applications: nanonanoparticles
Carbohydrate- protein interactions,
Nanomaterials in drug delivery e Nanosystems
systems used for diagnostic
and therapeutic
application

6. Evaluation Scheme:

Tutorial test 10 -15 min

Seminars

 

7. Chamber C onsultation Hour: To be announced in the class.

8. Make-Up: Make up would be considered only for regular students having genuine reasons.
No make-up will be given for seminar.

9, Notice: Notices, if any, concerning the course will be displayed on the in Nalanda website only.
10. Note (if any): NIL

INAMUR RAHAMAN LASKAR
Instructor-In-C harge
CHEM F336

Save Paper.
Save Trees.
£®© \save the Wort. innovate achieve —_—iead

Please Do Not Print Unless Necessary

 
