BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

SECOND SEMESTER 2020-21
COURSE HANDOUT
Date: 16.01.2021

In addition to part I (General Handout for all courses appended to the Time table) this portion gives further
specific details regarding the course.

Course No : CHEM F342

Course Title : ORGANIC CHEMISTRY IV
Instructor-in-C harge : RAJEEV SAKHUJA
Instructor(s) 
Tutorial/Practical Instructors: 
1. Course Description: The course aims at covering topics in synthesis and reaction of various heterocyclic
compounds, natural products and biomolecules. Structure, nomenclature, and common reactions of
heterocyclic compounds; synthesis, properties, and reactions of three-, four-, five-, and six-membered ring
systems; condensed five- and six-membered ring systems; introduction to natural products; terpenoids,
steroids, lipids, alkaloids, amino acids, peptides, proteins, and vitamins.

2. Scope and Objective of the C ourse:
At the end of the course, the student should be able to:
e Name simple three-, four-, five-, and six-membered heterocycles
e Devise synthesis of three-, four-, five-, and six-membered and benzo fused heterocyclic systems
e Recognize five important natural products and state why they are important
e Design simple synthesis and solve reaction related problems of the natural products discussed in the class

3. Text Books: TB1. Raj K Bansal, heterocyclic Chemistry, 5th edition, 2010 (TB), New Age International
publishers; TB2. I. L. Finar, Organic chemistry Vol. 2 2 Ster & The Chemistry of Natural Products, oth Ed.,
2005; Pearson.

4, Reference Books: R1. J.Clayden, N. Greeves, S. Warren, P. Wothers, Organic Chemistry, Oxford
University Press; R2. R. T. Morrison, R. Boyd, and S. K. Bhattacharjee, Organic Chemistry, 7th edition.

5. Course Plan:

Module Lecture/T utorial Session Reference Learning outcome
No.
1

L1-L3: Introduction and nomenclature | TB1: Chapter1 | Apply IUPAC nomenclature
of few heterocyclic compounds Class notes rules for naming three-, four-,

T1: Exercise problems on five-, and six-membered
nomenclature of heterocyclic heterocyclic ring systems
compounds

2 L4-L9: Chemistry of Three & Four- TB1: Chapter 2 | Devise synthesis of Aziridines,
membered heterocycles & 4 Oxirane, Thiiranes, oxetane,

T2: Exercise problems on reactions of | Refer class Thietane, A zetidine, and carry

Three & Four-membered heterocycles | notes their conversion to other
heterocyclic systems

L10-L15: Chemistry of five-membered | TB1: Chapter 5 | Devise synthesis of Pyrroles,
heterocycles R1: Chapter 43 | Furan and thiophenes and ca

   
 
 
  
  
 
  

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

   
   
 
 
 

their conversion to other
heterocyclic systems
L16-L17 Chemistry of Six-membered | TB1: Chapter | Devise synthesis of Pyridines
heterocycles 6 and carry their conversion to
T5: Exercise problems on reactions of | R1: Chapter 43 | other heterocyclic systems
six-membered heterocycles

5 L18-L20: Chemistry of Benzo-fused TB1: Chapter | Devise synthesis of quinoline,

heterocycles 7,8 isoquinoline and indoles and
T6-T7: Exercise problems on reactions | R1: Chapter 43 | Cally their conversion to other
of Benzo-fused heterocycles heterocyclic systems

L21-L27: Introduction to natural General Understand the importance of
products and Chemistry of selective TB2: Chapter | natural products & classify them.
terpenes and steroids VIII, XI: Class | Application of isoprene and
T8-T9: Exercise problems on the notes isoprenoids in biosynthesis of
chemistry of steroids and terpenoids terpenes, and perform structure
determination of L1-pinene,
citral, camphor, sterols, estrogen,
bile acids, and cholesterol
L28-L30: Importance and Chemistry of | TB2: Chapter | Understand the role of alkaloids
Alkaloids XIV and chemically determine the
T11: Exercise problems on chemistry structure of epinephrine,
Alkaloids pyrrolidine-pyridine group
alkaloids, cocoa alkaloids, and
quinine

L31-L36: Importance and Chemistry of | TB2: Chapter | Understand the role of amino
peptides and protiens XIII acids and peptides in biologically
T12: Exercise problems on chemistry active proteins, Devise the
Amino acids, Peptides, and Proteins synthesis of Peptides by Sanger,
Edman & Dansyl methods
Obtain the enzymatic cleavage of
peptides and the apply

protection de-protection groups
in synthesizing peptides and
proteins

L37-L38: Importance and Chemistry of | R2: Chapter 25, | Classify lipids including

lipids See class notes | phospholipids, sphingolipids,
T10: Exercise problems on chemistry _| for details nomenclature, and devise

of lipids synthesis of prostaglandins
L39-L40: Importance and Chemistry of | TB2: Chapter | Categorize types of vitamins and
Vitamins XVII design the synthesis of Vitamins
T13: Exercise problems on chemistry A, C, and B-complex

of Vitamins

 

 

 

 

 
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

6. Evaluation Scheme:

Weightage (“% ) Date & Time
Mid- Semester Test 30 (60 M To be announced by AUGSD

Examination

Quiz/A ssignment 30 (60 M Continuous

$ The nature of the component will be announced before the specific examination.

 

, 0
Comprehensive 120 Min. 40
0

(60 M)
(80 M) 08/05 FN
(60 M)

7. Chamber C onsultation Hour: Saturday, 9.00-10.00 AM

8. Notices: Notices concerning the course will be communicated by emails.

9, Make-up Policy: As per Institute’s policy
10. Note (if any):

Instructor-in-charge
Course No. CHEM F342
