BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

SECOND SEMESTER 2020-21
COURSE HANDOUT

 

Date: 17.01.2021

In addition to part I (General Handout for all courses appended to the Time table) this portion gives further
specific details regarding the course.

Course No : CHEM F343
Course Title : Inorganic Chemistry III
Instructor-in-C harge : AJAY KUMAR SAH

Tutorial/Practical Instructors: Ajay Kumar Sah
1. Course Description:

This course encompasses several aspects of the elements of periodic table encountered in inorganic chemistry typically
in numerous application/ functional areas such as, life processes, modern day-to-day living, medical and fine chemical
applications etc. Some important key- phrases are as follows,

Bio-inorganic chemistry; metalloenzymes; metalloproteins; role of alkali and alkaline earth metal ions, iron, copper,
zinc, molybdenum etc. in life processes; metals in medicine; metal deficiency and toxicity aspects (mercury, cadmium,
lead, beryllium, selenium and arsenic etc.); metals used in diagnosis and chemotherapy; electronic, magnetic and
photonic materials; emerging research topics in inorganic chemistry, such as catalysis, inorganic polymers,
nanomaterials and hybrid materials.

2. Scope and Objective of the Course: The most important objective of the course is to acquire knowledge and
understanding about the roles and importance of the different elements (majorly metals) in life processes, medicinal
purposes and augmenting the quality of life of mankind by breakthrough advancements in human civilization. As an
integral part of learning the applications of inorganic chemistry, this course will be utilizing the knowledge and
understanding gained in the foundation courses of General Chemistry, IC-I and IC-II for probing deeper in to the
chemistry of biological systems, chemistry of modern materials, chemistry in industrial processes for commodity and
fine chemicals, medicines, sensors etc. On successful completion of the course, the following learning objectives will
be fulfilled

Introduction to bioinorganic chemistry

11) Understanding the role of metal centers in biological systems (typically redox systems)

ili) Metals in medical applications, toxicity and deficiency aspects

iv) Introduction to electronic, photonic and magnetic materials involving inorganic chemistry
Inorganic chemistry involved in industrial applications such as polymer synthesis, catalysis etc.

Vi) Exposure to the emerging research areas of functional materials chemistry including inorganic polymers,
nanomaterials, hybrid materials etc.

3. Text Books:
T1. J. A. Cowan, "Inorganic Biochemistry An Introduction", Wiley-VCH, 2nd edition.

T2. The Science and Engineering of Materials, Donald R. Askeland, Pradeep P. Phule, Cengage Learning (Indian
edition)
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

 

4, Reference Books:
R1. S.J. Lippard and J. M. Berg, "Principles of Bioinorganic Chemistry", University Science Books

R2. 1. Bertini, H. B. Gray, S.J. Lippard, J. S. Valentine, Bioinorganic Chemistry”, Viva, 1998.
R3. William D. Callister, Materials Science and Engineering, Wiley-India Edition, 2007.
3. Course Plan:

Ch-1

2 (Lecture 2-4) Metal ion storage and transport: Metal T1; p133-61 The mechanism for transion uptake and transmembrane ion membrane ion transport
transport, storage of metal ions like alkali, alkaline earth

metals, transition metal
ions.

The mechanism for iron
storage

3 (Lecture 5-7) Metalloproteins and Metalloenzymes: T1; pl167-194 | The role of transition metal
Oxygen carriers and Hydrolase enzymes ions displaying cooperative
binding in proteins and

enzymes

ions in biology and Class note | reactions and fundamentals
5 (Lecture 11-13) | Involvement of Redox Chemistry in underlying their reactivity
electron transfer pathways and Class not

6 (Lecture 14-16) | Role of alkali and alkaline earth metal T1; p257-284 | The role of metal-ions as
ions enzyme activators and cofactors
7 (Lecture 17-19) | Enrichment strategies and intracellular Class notes
chemistry of low-abundant metals,
Spontaneous self-assembly of metal
clusters
8 (Lecture 20) Introduction and overview, Essential Class notes
metals, Anemia and Iron, Causes and
consequences of zinc deficiency, copper
deficienc

9 (Lecture 21) Toxic effects of Metals: Copper Class notes Interference of exogenous
overload and Wilkinson diseases, [ron metal ions and resistance
Toxicity, Toxic effects of other essential mechanism
elements, Mercury Toxicity and
Bacterial resistance, cadmium and lead

10 (Lecture 22) Metals used in diagnosis and Class notes Coordination Complexes
chemotherapy, Radiodiagnostic agents, as Therapeutic A gents
Magnetic Resonance Imaging, Lithium
and mental health, Gold and Rheumatoid
Arthritis

11 (Lecture 23-25) | Electronic materials: Band structure of T2; p677-718 | Origin of important
solids, Conductivity in solids, properties of conductors,

 
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

Superconductivity, Semiconductors, semiconductors,
Insulators and dielectric properties, insulators, dielectrics and
Piezoelectricity, Pyroelectricity, superconductors
Ferroelectricity

12 (Lecture 26-28) | Magnetic materials: Classification of T2;p725-751 | The interaction of
magnetic materials, Magnetization, materials with magnetic
Permeability, Diamagnetic , fields
Paramagnetic, Ferromagnetic,
Superparamagnetic materials, Domain
structure and the hysteresis loop, The
curie temperature, Metallic and ceramic
magnetic materials

13 (Lecture 29-31) | Photonic materials :The electromagnetic | T2;p757-781 | The interaction of
spectrum, Refraction, Reflection, electromagnetic radiation
Absorption and Transmission, Selective or photons with materials
absorption, Transmission or Reflection,

 

Example and use of emission
phenomena

14 (Lecture 32-35) | Polymer synthesis, Catalysis by metals, Class notes
Types of polymerization reactions using
metals, Types of catalysis, variants

15 (Lecture 36-40) | Emerging areas in inorganic chemistry: Class notes Understanding about the
Inorganic polymers, Nanomaterials, current advancement in the

Hybrid materials etc field of materials

  

6. Evaluation Scheme:

Component Duration Weightage Date & Time
(Marks)

Mid-Semester Test 30% (60) To be announced by AUGSD

= [0% 60
Comprehensive 120 min. 40% (80) As announced in the Timetable (12/05 FN)
Examination

7. Chamber Consultation Hour: To be announced in the class.

8. Notices: Notices concerning the course will be put up on Nalanda and/or the chemistry notice board.

9, Make-up Policy: Make up request would be considered only for genuine cases.

Instructor-in-charge
Course No. CHEM 343
