 

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
Instruction Division

 

 

SECOND SEMESTER 2020-2021
Course Handout (Part IT)
Date: 16-01-2021

In addition to part I (General Handout for all courses appended to the time table) this portion gives further specific
details regarding the course.

Course Number: CS F363
Course Title: Compiler Construction
Instructor-in-charge: SHASHANK GUPTA, (shashank.gupta@ pilani.bits-pilani.ac.in)
Instructor: Dr. Vinti Agarwal (vinti.agarwal@ pilani.bits-pilani.ac.in)
Y emineni Ashok (p20190024@ pilani.bits-pilani.ac.in)
Course W ebsite: http://nalanda.bits-pilani.ac.in/
1. Objective

To expose the students to a class of special algorithms to process languages to translate high level user
programs to low level assembly code. This includes algorithms and data structures handling both front end and
back end of the compiler.

2. Scope of the course

This course is an introductory course to compiler construction. In this course, students will learn the
important basic elements of compilation to use the techniques required for designing compiler. Topics include
lexical analysis, parsing techniques, syntax directed translation, symbol table, intermediate code generation, data
flow analysis, code generation, code optimization, error detection and recovery.

3. Pre-requisite courses

The course on Compiler Construction uses the concepts learnt in earlier courses such as ‘Theory of
Computation’, ‘Data Structures and Algorithms’ and ‘Principles of Programming Languages’ which are also the
pre-requisite courses done by the students. Students will be expected to have sufficient understanding of the
concepts of finite automata theory e.g. DFA (Deterministic Finite Automata), NFA (Non-deterministic Finite
Automata), State Minimization Algorithm, CFG (Context Free Grammar), parse tree, ambiguity, push down
automata etc. Also, each student should have a prior knowledge of data structures and experience in implementing
linked list, stacks, trees, hash table, dynamic arrays etc.

4. Books
‘Text Book

T1 Compilers Principles, Techniques, and Tools.
Authors: Alfred V. Aho, Monica S. Lam, Ravi Sethi, Jeffery D. Ullman
Publisher: Pearson Education. Second Edition.

Reference Books

Rl Programming Languages - Concepts and Constructs

As res a

fee, Save Trees.
g°>* Save the World. Ty ae

Please Do Not Print Unless Necessary

 

 
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
Instruction Division

 

 

Author: Ravi Sethi
Publisher: Pearson Education.

R2 Introduction to Algorithms
Authors: Thomas H. Cormen, Charles E. Leiserson, Ronald L. Rivest, Clifford Stein
Publisher: Prentice Hall of India

R3 Modern Compiler Implementation in C.
Author: Andrew W. Appel
Publisher: Cambridge University Press. (Foundation Books, New Delhi.) .

R4 Modern Compiler Implementation in Java.
Author: Andrew W. Appel
Publisher: Cambridge University Press. (Foundation Books, New Delhi.) .

Ro Concepts in Programming Languages
Author: Robert W. Sebesta
Publisher: Pearson Education Inc.

39. Course Plan
Modules and Learning Objectives

Module Title Learning Objective(s)
Cl Introduction to Compilers To understand the context and use of a compiler.

To understand the implementation of a front end of a compiler - scanning,

C2 Front End of a Compiler parsing und semantic analysis

To understand the implementation of a back end of a compiler - run time

Cs Back End of a Compiler environments, Code Generation and Register allocation.

Special aspects of To understand some special aspects of compilers and runtime such as code

4 . oe. .
C compilers andruntime — optimization, garbage collection etc.

Lecture Schedule

er

Overview of the course-language processors-compiler and
interpreters, Phases of compiler, need for different compilers,
attributes of a good compiler, source and target code, a
language processing system, structure of a compiler. Course
administration overview-evaluation components, project
details etc.

Ae gy

 

Save Trees.
Save the World. innovate ere

Please Do Not Print Unless Necessary

 
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
Instruction Division

 

Lexical Analysis-Tokens, patterns, lexemes, lexical errors,

input buffering, regular expressions, recognition of tokens,

Transition diagrams, recognition of reserved words and

identifiers, architecture of a transition diagram based lexical C2 SC
analyzer, look ahead operator, Pattern matching based on

NFA, DFA for lexical analyzer, Optimization of DFA based

pattern matcher, State minimization in lexical analyzers, DFA

simulation.

Syntax Analysis: Role of a parser, representative grammars,
syntax error handling, error recovery strategies, CFG, parse
7 trees, derivations, ambiguity, syntactic correctness, parsing C2 SG
process, Recursive Descent Parsing, left recursion
elimination, left factoring.

 

Syntax Analysis: Top Down Parsing- first and follow sets,
LL(1) Grammars, construction of predictive parsing table,
Le . a C2 SG
Non Recursive Predictive parsing, error recovery in predictive
Syntax Analysis: Bottom Up Parsing- LR parsing, reductions,
handle pruning, shift-reduce parsing, conflicts, Simple LR
1-13 |parsing, Items and LR(0) Automaton, LR parsing algorithm,} C2 SG
SLR parsing tables, LR(1) Parsers: CLR(1) and LALR(1)
Parsers, parser generators.

4-17 |Syntax directed translation, inherited and synthesized
attributes, evaluation order, dependency graphs, evaluation of} C2 SG
attributes, construction of Abstract Syntax Tree (AST)

3.

6
Q.

1

1
8

equivalence

Intermediate Representation; Intermediate Language , three

21-22 \jaddress code, quadruples, triples, semantic rules to generate C3 VA
intermediate code for various constructs.
Code Generation-target language, program and instruction
cost, addresses in the target code, run time addresses fon

23 . C3 VA
names, register and address descriptors, code generation
algorithm.

95-26 [Run Time Environments: Storage organization, Stack} c4 VA
allocation of space, contents of an activation record, memory
Save Paper. :

0
1020 Checking and Type Inferencing- type expressions, type
-24

ae) Save Trees.
£ = Agave the World. mm go

Please Do Not Print Unless Necessary

 
 

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
Instruction Division

 

access links.
nq (Code Optimization-Basic blocks, next use information, flow C3 VA
graphs, optimization of basic blocks, Liveness analysis.

models, calling sequences, variable length data on the stack,
access to non-local data on the stack, data access without
nested scopes, issues with nested procedures, nesting depth,

7-29
0-32 [Register Allocation, Instruction selection
33.94 Code optimization- Peephole optimization, redundant code
Machine Independent O ptimizations-Global Common Sub35-36 jexpressions, copy propagation, dead code elimination, C4 VA
induction variables and reduction in strength etc.
37.38 Garbage Collection- Mark and sweep algorithm, reference CA VA
counting algorithm
-40

elimination, flow of control optimizations.
Discussion on few existing compilers VA

 

* SG: Dr. Shashank Gupta *V A: Dr. Vinti Agarwal

6. Evaluation Scheme: The overall weightage is 200.

S. No. Component Mode Duration Date Weigh
t

1 Mid Semester Test Closed Book 90min TBA 30%
(visit AUGSD
website)

2. Quiz 1 Open Book TBA (20 Feb- 28 Feb) 15%
TBA

3. Quiz 2 Open Book TBA (1SApril-29April) 15%
TBA

4. Comprehensive Exam Partially Open Book 60 Min May 15" (FN) 40%

Save Trees.
Save the World. innovate rT

Please Do Not Print Unless Necessary

4 WA se Paper. Pe.

 
 

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
Instruction Division

 

 

 

7.

Makeup Policy:

e Quiz 1 and Quiz 2 would have only one combined make up exam. This means, that a student can abstain
herself/himself (on valid reasons) in one Quiz. This make up would be conducted at last and would include
complete syllabus. Of course, the student would apply for the make up in advance with documentary proof.

e Only on producing documentary proof of possible absence, which proves that student would be physically
unable to appear for the test/exam, the decision of granting the make-up will be taken.

e Prior Permission of AUGSD is required to get make-up for the comprehensive exam.

8. Notices and Announcements
e Necessary notices, course announcements, uploading of marks of each component will be done on BITSNalanda. Y ou are requested to check this website periodically. e-mail will be used as and when required.

9. Consultation Hour

Hour

Shashank Gupta Friday 5:00 PM — 6:00 PM
Vinti A garwal Tuesday 5:00 PM — 6:00 PM

**Tt is requested to the students to drop an email regarding an appointment for the concerned Instructor before
joining the consultation hours.

 

10. Open Book Policy
e The prescribed text book, reference books listed in the handout and hand written (student’s own) class
notes are the only materials that will be allowed.

Instructor-in-charge

CS F363

 

(2 \sane the Wore

innovate

Please Do Not Print Unless Necessary
