BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

Second Semester 2020-2021
COURSE HANDOUT (PART Il)
Date: 17/01/2021
In addition to Part-| (general handout for all courses appended to this time table) this portion gives further
details pertaining to the course.
Course No.: CS F415
Course Title: Data Mining
Instructor-in-charge: YASHVARDHAN SHARMA (yash@ pilani.bits-pilani.ac.in)
Lab Instructor : Divya Bharadwaj (p20180013@ pilani.bits-pilani.ac.in)
1. Objective and Scope
The course explores the concepts and techniques of data mining, a promising and flourishing frontier in
database systems. Data Mining is automated extraction of patterns representing knowledge implicitly stored in
large databases, data warehouses, and other massive information repositories. It is a decision support tool that
addresses unique decision support problems that cannot be solved by other data analysis tools such as Online
Analytical Processing (OLAP). The course covers data mining tasks like constructing decision trees, finding
association rules, classification, and clustering. The course is designed to provide students with a broad
understanding in the design and use of data mining algorithms. The course also aims at providing a holistic
view of data mining. It will have database, statistical, algorithmic and application perspectives of data mining.

2. Text Book
i) TanP.N., Steinbach M & Kumar V. “Introduction to Data Mining” Pearson Education, 2016.
3. Reference Books
i) Han J & Kamber M, “Data Mining: Concepts and Techniques”, Morgan Kaufmann Publishers,
Third Edition, 2012
li) Zaki MJ & Wagner M JR, “Data Mining and Analysis-Fundamental Concepts and Algorithms”
Cameridge Univ Press, 2014.

ii) Dunhum M.H. & Sridhar S. “Data Mining-Introductory and Advanced Topics’, Pearson

Education, 2006.
Chapter
Reference

1+Class
Notes

4. Course Plan

Learning Objective

No.

1-2 To understand the
definition and applications
of Data Mining

3-5

Topic(s)

Introduction to Data Mining
Motivation
What is Data Mining?
Data Mining Tasks
Issues in Data Mining
Applications

Data Preprocessing
Types of data

To understand types of
data and to improve the
quality of data and
efficiency and the ease of
the mining process.

To study how to
investigate the data

 

innovate lead

 

Data Quality
Data preprocessing
Similarity and Dissimilarity Measures

Data Exploration
Data Set & its Statistics
Visualization
OLAP & Multidimensional Data Analysis

Save Paper.
aS) Save Trees.
£ > 4Save the World.

3 Self Study

Please Consider Your Environmental Responsibilities

 

Do Not Print Unless Necessary
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

To understand Classification 4+Class
Classification and its Introduction Notes
applications Applications |

Decision Tree based Algorithms

Model Over-fitting

Performance Evaluation of a Classifier

Comparing Classifiers
To study the alternative Classification: Alternative Techniques 5
approaches for Rule Based Classifier

Bayesian Classification

Support Vector Machine

Ensemble Classifiers

Class Imbalance Problem

Multiclass Problem

 

To understand Association Rule Mining
applications of Introduction
Association Rule Mining Applications

and algorithms to find Market-Basket Analysis
them Frequent Itemsets

Apriori Algorithm
Alternative Methods

To understand methods Advanced Association Rule Mining 7+Class
and need for finding Generalized Association Rules Notes
complex Association Multilevel Association Rules
Rules Multidimensional Association Rules

Temporal Association Rules

Infrequent Patterns

Constrained Based Association Rules

To understand Clustering

applications and Introduction

algorithms for Clustering Applications
Partitioning Algorithms
Hierarchical Algorithms
Density based Algorithms
Cluster Evaluation

To study advanced topics Clustering: Additional Issues and Algorithms
in cluster analysis Characteristics of Data, Clusters and clustering
Algorithms
Graph Based Clustering
Scalable Clustering Algorithms

To understand detection Anomaly Detection 10
of anomalies & their Preliminaries
causes Statistical Approaches
Proximity based Outlier Detection
Density based Outlier Detection
Clustering Based Techniques
To introduce advanced Advanced Topics Class Notes
topics in Data Mining Web Mining
Incremental Algorithms for Data Mining
Stream Data Mining

Save Paper.
age. Save Trees.
innovate Prorat ews) for Asave the World.
Please Consider Your Environmental Responsibilities
Do Not Print Unless Necessary

 

 
     
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

5. Evaluation Schedule

Weightage(%) | Date & Time

Mid Sem Exam 90 Mins. 30 To be Closed
announced Book

pemmrenrres| TT sees ||

announced

[meses free [een Te
open

 

7. Labs
Two hour lab will be conducted every week. Students will be applying the concepts of data mining on the
problems Python Programming and IBM SPSS Modeler. Students will also be exposed to modeling of the

problems.
8. Assignments
Assignment(s) (programming/reading) will be given to the students. This will immensely help the
Students in gaining a better understanding of the subject.

9. Chamber Consultation Hours
To be announced in the class.

10. Make-up Policy: Prior Permission is must and Make-up shall be granted only in genuine cases based on
individual’s need and circumstances.

11. Notices
All the notices concerning this course will be displayed on the CSIS Notice Board or course website.

Instructor-in-charge

A Save Paper.
a. Save Trees.
£ > SSave the World.

Please Consider Your Environmental Responsibilities
Do Not Print Unless Necessary

 

innovate achieve |

 
