 

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division
SECOND SEMESTER 2020-2021
Course Handout (Part II)

 

 

18/01/2021
In addition to part-| (General Handout for all courses appended to the timetable) this portion gives further specific details
regarding the course

Course No. : ECON F342

Course Title : APPLIED ECONOMETRICS
Instructor-in-Charge : N.V. MURALIDHAR RAO
Instructor(s)

Tutorial/Practical Instructors : NVM Rao

1. Course Description:

This course provides an introduction to advanced estimation and econometric techniques of analysis, with particular emphasis on how
these techniques can be used for the empirical testing of economic theories and/or policy prescriptions. Topics to be studied include
specification, estimation, and inference in the context of models that include then extend beyond the standard linear multiple
regression frameworks.

Multiple regression analysis; analysis of generalized linear and nonlinear models; instrumental variables; maximum likelihood,
generalized method of moments (GMM), and two step estimation methods; simultaneous equation models; time series processes;
identification and estimation of time series models; techniques for assessing model fit; forecasting; time series analysis and models of
expectations; univariate time series analysis, stationary vs. non-stationary series; ARIMA, GARCH, VAR, co-integration, granger
causality, error correction and limited dependent variable models; auto regressive distributed lagged variable models multivariate time
series analysis; dynamic models; analysis of panel data, balanced and unbalanced panel data, mixed, fixed and random effect
models.

2. Scope and objective of the course:

This is a course in applied econometrics, emphasizing the implementation of econometric techniques to analyze concrete economic

problems, using data and econometric software. Though not a theoretical course, we will introduce some basic theory and concepts to

motivate an appropriate use of econometric methods.

Specific Objectives:

e To explain the theory behind estimating econometric methods and provide an analytical and quantitative
background in the fundamentals of econometric analysis.

e To give students opportunities to use econometric models and methods in analysis and problem solving. Students
will learn how to choose the adequate method, discuss its identifying assumptions, correctly interpret its results
and to translate them into economically meaningful answers

The course uses the fundamental concepts of econometric methods and applies them to data to build, estimate and interpret their own

econometric models for concrete economic and financial problems.

3. Text Book (TB):
Introductory Econometrics- A Modern Approach by J Wooldridge, 5" Edition (ISBN No. 9788131516737), South Western Cengage
Learning

4. References

R1. Ramu Ramanathan, Introductory Econometrics with Applications, Fifth Edition, S-W Cengage Learning, Indian Edition 2008

R2. James H. Stock and Mark W. Watson, Introduction to Econometrics, Second Edition, Pearson Addison-Wesley, 2007

R3. Greene, W., Econometric Analysis, 7th Edition, Prentice Hall, 2041

R4. Jack Johnston and John Dinardo, Econometric Methods, Fourth Edition, McGraw-Hill, 1997.

R5. — Intriligator, Bodkin and Hsiao, Econometric Models, Techniques, and Applications, Second Edition, Prentice Hall, 1996.

R6. G.S. Maddala, Introduction to Econometrics, Second Edition, MacMillan, 1992

R7. Judge etal., The Theory and Practice of Econometrics, Second Edition, Wiley, 1994

R8. Damodar. N. Gujarati and Sangeetha, Basic Econometrics, Fourth Edition, Tata McGraw-Hill Publishing Company Limited, 2007

R9. R.S. Pindyck and D.L. Rubinfeld , Econometric Models and Economic Forecasts, Third Edition, McGraw-Hill: New York, 1991

R10. H. Baltagi Badi, Econometrics, Springer, Delhi, Second Edition, 1999

R11. H. Theil, Econometrics, Wiley, New York, 1968.

R12. A.S. Goldberger, Econometric Theory, Wiley, New York, 1964.

R13. “Econometric Applications in India”, Edited by K L Krishna, Oxford, New Delhi, 1997.

Save Paper.
gy. Save Trees.
£ © Agave the World.

 

innovate achieve

Please Do Not Print Unless Necessary
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division
SECOND SEMESTER 2020-2021
Course Handout (Part II)

 

 

5. Course Plan:

Mod Reference Learning Outcome (s)

Learning Objectives Lecture Session (Book) (on successful completion of
this part, student will be able to:

Review of important Simple and multiple regressions: Chapters . Understands and expresses the
Concepts 1, 2, and 3 (skim) core underlying econometric model

rincipals
Dummy variables; Heteroskedasticity ue

Other Important Concepts will be
reviewed from time to time.

Analysis with Cross Section Data
Demonstrate an understanding of

Functional form Misspecification, modeling nonlinear mareesione
Specification and Data Problems g non gres
misspecification and data issues

. . . Class
Class Exercises & Discussion
Notes

Regression Analysis with Time Series Data

Specification and Data
Issues

Basic Time Series Time series Data and Time Series Perform basic econometric
Regression Models Regression Models; analysis for time series data;
0.11 Finite Sample Properties of OLS
Functional Form, Dummy Variables and
Index Numbers , ,
Serial Correlation and

Trends and Seasonality Heteroscedasticity in Time Series

Further Issues in Using Stationarity and Weakly Dependent Time
OLS Series
945 Highly Persistent Time Series Identify and estimate
Dynamically Complete Model autoregressive integrated moving
; average (ARIMA) models and
Homoskedasticity Assumption for Time ebtain forecasts ef economic

Series Models variables.

Serial Correlation and
| nae Serial Correlation and Heteroscedasticity in
Heteroscedasticity in .
16-17 Time Series Time Series; Testing and Corrections; OLS

and FGLS

Time Series Models Stationary vs. Non-stationary Series,
18-21 ARIMA, GARCH, VAR, Co-integration,

Granger causality; Error Correction Models

 

 

B Save Paper.
Save Trees.
\Save the World.

innovate Flot al (oat cl

Please Do Not Print Unless Necessary
 

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division
SECOND SEMESTER 2020-2021
Course Handout (Part II)

eae nn nc ll EE Te
. . . Class
Class Exercise & Discussion
Notes

Advanced Time Series Infinite Distributed Lag Models, Testing Unit Understands the distributed lag
Concepts Roots, Spurious Regressions, VAR, Co- Ch. 18 models; VAR and cointegration,

 

integration, Granger causality; Error error correction models
Correction Models, Forecasting

27 Class Exercise & Discussion Class
Notes

Other Topics:

Pooling Cross Section Panel Data Methods Difference-in- Construct, estimate and
and Time Series Data Differences estimator; First Difference understands econometric models
58-30 Estimator; Fixed effects and random effects a 13 and | with panel data methods
estimators; Individual Effects and Fixed
Effects Models; Balanced and Unbalance
ie Data;

Class Exercise & Discussion
Notes
. _— and test models using
Instrumental Variables Endogenous regressors, simultaneity, and instrumental variables and two
32-34 (IV) Estimation and Two | Instrumental Variables; Two Stage Least Ch.15
oe least squares;
Stage Least Squares Squares
35 Class Exercise & Discussion
Notes

Simultaneous Equations | Simultaneous Equations Models, Problems Confidently discuss the problem of
Models of identification and estimation, identification, simultaneity _ bias;

36-38 Ch .16
Simultaneity Bias, Simultaneous Equations and simultaneous equation models

Models with Time Series and Panel Data related time series and panel data

Limited Dependent Binary dependent and Linear Probability Construct, estimate and test
Variable Models Model: Probit and Logit Models: Count and | Ch. 17 econometric models with limited
dependent variables; logit and

Censor Data probit models
|_| conclusion | Overall Review ofthe Course - |

oe Evaluation Scheme:

ECNo, No. | Evaluation Component ee Date & Time Nature OF
rrr Beck

1 Mid Semester Test Ft Closed Book

Tutorial/

Class Tests /Quizzes/Class 15 min each 25 Tutorial: THURSDAY “9 hr Closed Book/ Open
ae To be announced in the class Book

Participation

| 3 | Course Empirical Project /- | 10s] To be announced in the class _| Closed Book
Comprehensive Examination 10/5 FN Partly Open Book

7. Chamber Consultation hours: Wednesday 4.00-5.00 pm

 

 

 

B Save Paper.
Save Trees.
\Save the World.

innovate Flot al (oat cl

Please Do Not Print Unless Necessary
 

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division
SECOND SEMESTER 2020-2021
Course Handout (Part II)

— dd
Notices: Notices would be sent to students through course mail id. It will be also communicated through
Student group coordinator.

Make-up: Make-up may be given only on genuine grounds. Prior permission has to be obtained.

. Other Course Policy Issues:

E-mail address for this course related information: nvmappliedeconometrics@gmail.com.

Course Class Coverage and details of specific topics from the chapter will be announced in the class from time to time.
Assignment/Problem Sheets and Reading Assignments will be assigned periodically. For Reading Assignments, students are expected to
consult the books or specific course handout notes as advised in the classroom.

The Empirical Project is a group project in which students form teams of three (3) members and work on a practical empirical topic using
modern econometric techniques. Further information and material on the empirical project will be made available as the course proceeds.
You are expected to collect and analyze a data set using the econometric methods.

No makeup examination will be given for class tests and quizzes. Class Participation is a must.

Students are expected to attend class and to arrive on time and prepared. You should read the sections in the textbook we are going
to cover in class prior to following the lecture.

If there are problems of any nature that concern the class of which | am unaware of and which need to be addressed, please feel free
to discuss this with me at any time. The main objective is to foster an environment where people who are interested in the subject
matter have the opportunity to discuss their questions in a positive learning environment.

 

The instructor in charge reserves the right to make adjustments to this syllabus. Any change will be notified at least
one week in advance. But itis your responsibility to stay informed if you do not attend all the classes.

 

INSTRUCTOR-IN-CHARGE
ECON F342

 

Save Paper.
P As Trees.
> ASave the World.

innovate

Please Do Not Print Unless Necessary
