BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, PILANI
INSTRUCTION DIVISION
SECOND SEMESTER 2020-2021

Course Handout (Part Il)
18.01.2021

In addition to Part-I (General Handout for all courses appended to the time table) this portion gives further specific details regarding the course.

Course No. : ECON F241

Course Title : ECONOMETRIC METHODS
Instructor-in-charge : N. V. M. RAO

Instructor -NVM Rao

1. Course Description:

Introduction to Regression Analysis - Specification of simple linear regression model, least square method of estimation,
classical assumptions, general and confidence approach to hypothesis testing. Specification of Models; estimation of single
equation economic models and related problems; Auto -correlation, multicollinearity and heteroscedasticity, Multiple
regression analysis; regression using dummy variables; simultaneous equation models.

2. Scope and Objective of the Course:

The purpose of this course is to introduce students to the econometric theory and methods. It covers the basic tools of
estimation and inference in the context of the single-equation linear regression model, and deals primarily with least squares
methods of estimation. The course emphasizes the intuitive understanding and practical application of these basic tools of
regression analysis, as distinct from their formal theoretical development. Topics include simple and multiple linear regression
analysis, correlation, and hypothesis testing. Both conceptual and practical problems are considered, including
multicollinearity, dummy variables, heteroscedasticity, autocorrelation, specification and measurement errors. Some emphasis
will also be placed on models using time series data, panel data and simultaneous equation estimation. Course material is
presented predominantly in scalar terms; the use of matrix algebra is confined to Summarizing major results and to interpreting
output listings of computer software programs. The course is designed to build a solid base of theoretical understanding, and
exercise this theory with economic applications, providing a base of practical knowledge.

3. Learning Outcomes

Knowledge outcomes

e The basic econometric techniques and their applications and equip them with a broad knowledge of regression analysis relevant for
analyzing economic data.

e To interpret and critically evaluate the outcomes of empirical analysis by using standard methods like properties of least squares
estimators and the statistical testing of hypothesis.

e _Postulation and testing of hypotheses pertaining to economic issues or problems.

e To derive and analyze the properties of estimators, test statistics and compare their performance

e Basic procedures for model validation.

Skills

e Become a critical reader of the literature concerning empirical analyses and become a qualified user of econometric methods

e Tobe able to use a computer based program package for performing different types of econometric analyses

e Toperform different statistical tests and carry out regression analyses of empirical data in computer software.

Competencies

e To be able to read and understand project reports and journal articles that make use of the concepts and methods which will be
introduced during the semester under this course

e To be able to make use of basic econometric models in any kind of academic work

4. Text Book:
Christopher Dougherty, Introduction to Econometrics, Oxford, Fourth Edition, Indian Edition, 2011.
Reference Books:
R1. Johnston J and John Dinardo, Econometric Methods, McGraw-Hill International, MGHISE, 4" Edition, 1997
R2. Damodar. N. Gujarati and Sangeetha, Basic Econometrics, Tata McGraw-Hill Publishing Company Limited, Fourth Edition, 2007
R3. R.S. Pindyck and D.L. Rubinfeld , Econometric Models and Economic Forecasts, Third Edition, McGraw-Hill: New York, 1991
R4. H. Baltagi Badi, Econometrics, Springer, Delhi, Second Edition, 1999
R5. Ramu Ramanathan, Introductory Econometrics With Applications, Thomson South-Western, Fifth Edition, 2002
R6. Wonnacott & Wonnacott, Econometrics, Wiley, New York, 1970.

Page 1 of 3
5. Course Plan:

Reference
to
Text Book

Simple Linear Model

Assumptions; Derivation and Interpretation of
Regression Coefficients; The Correlation
Coefficient; Goodness of Fit

Types of Data and Regression Model;
Properties of Regression Coefficients
Gauss-Markov Theorem; F-test

Extension of two variable model;

Derivation and Interpretation of the multiple
regression coefficients; Properties of the
multiple regression coefficients;

Learning
Objective(s) Topics to be Covered

1 The Nature and Scope of

aa Econometrics

Introduction

The Simple Linear

Review of Statistics
Regression Analysis
10-14

Properties of Regression
Coefficients

Hypothesis Testing
Multiple Regression
Analysis

15-18
19-21

Multicollinearity Multicollinearity; Consequences
Multicollinearity; Tests for Detecting the

Multicollinearity and Solutions;

Class Notes

Non Linear Models and | Basic Procedure;
Transformation Transformation; Nonlinear
Variables Comparison Linear and

22-25
Specification

Variable; The Chow Test
29-31 Specification of | Model Specification; Exclusion of Relevant | Ch.6
Regression Variables

and inclusion of irrelevant variable; Proxy
32-34 Heteroscedasticity Ch.7 and

Variables; Testing of Linear Restriction
Class Notes
35-37 Autocorrelation

Logarithmic
Regression;
Logarithmic

for the Case of Autocorrelation; Prediction
Introduction to Simultaneous Equation
Models; Simultaneous Dependence of
variables and Consequences; Simultaneous
Bias; The Problem of Identification;

Review of Course Completed [=

Heteroscedasticity and its Implications; Tests
Ch 12 and
Class Notes
38-40 Simultaneous Equation

for Detection; Solutions; Prediction
Sources of Autocorrelation, The First-order
Autoregressive Scheme; Tests; Solutions
Ch.9
Estimation - Introduction and
Notes

Class

6. Evaluation Schedule:

Date & Time -- Venue

Learning Outcome(s)

fundamental —_ techniques
and assumptions involving
regression
estimation:
interpretation of coefficients
in the context of specific
regression models;
construct appropriate
regression specifications,
extensions of — simple
regressions
Identifying and correcting (if
possible) the problems
arising due to
multicollinearity;
Understand the
transformation of variables
and nonlinear models

Introduction of _ binary
variables into regression
Understand the
specification of regression
variables and model
Identifying and correcting
(if possible) the problem of
heteroscedasticity and
autocorrelation

Understand the basics of
simultaneous equation
estimation models — of
econometrics.

 

Evaluation Component | ecsio Weightage
(%)

MIDSEM TEST
CLASS TESTS / QUIZZES / _
5

TUTORIALS PPR Monday 10 hr

ASSIGNMENTS Will be announced in the
PARTICIPATION class

CLASS

COMPREHENSIVE EXAMINATION 13/05 FN

Nature of Evaluation

Closed Book
Closed Book

Closed Book

 

Partly Open Book

7. Chamber consultation hour: Thursday 4.00pm-5.00pm

8. Notices: All notices regarding the course would be sent to student course mail group.

9. Make-up Policy: Make-up exam for Mid Semester Test and Comprehensive Examination may be given only on genuine grounds; prior
permission of I/C is required to get a makeup test.

10. Other Course Policy Issues:

E-mail address for this course related information: nvmraoeconometrics@gmail.com

Page 2 of 3
e Students are expected to attend class and to arrive on time and prepared. You should read the sections in the textbook we
are going to cover in class prior to following the lecture.

e Assignment/Problem Sheets and Reading Assignments will be assigned periodically. They must be worked out to understand
the subject. For Reading Assignments, students are expected to consult the books, Research Articles, notes and Reports as
advised in the classroom.

e If there are problems of any nature that concern the class of which | am unaware of and which need to be addressed, please
feel free to discuss this with me at any time. The main objective is to foster an environment where people who are
interested in the subject matter have the opportunity to discuss their questions in a positive learning environment.

e Use of mobile phones/electronic devices is not allowed during the class hour.

The instructor reserves the right to make adjustments to this syllabus. Any change will be notified at least one week in
advance. But itis your responsibility to stay informed if you do not attend all the classes.

Instructor-in-charge
ECON F241

Page 3 of 3
