BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

 

 

SECOND SEMESTER 2020-21
COURSE HANDOUT
Date: 18.01.2021
In addition to part I (General Handout for all courses appended to the Timetable) this portion gives further specific
details regarding the course.

Course No : ECON F242

Course Title : MICROECONOMICS
Instructor-in-C harge : GEETILAXMI MOHAPATRA
Tutorial Instructor : GEETILAXMI MOHAPATRA

1. Course Description:
The course is designed to give emphasis on the application of real life examples on various fundamental issues of
Microeconomics.

2. Scope and Objective of the C ourse:

This course extends the tools of modern microeconomic theory and discusses their application to utility and demand;
production functions and cost; pricing of output under perfect competition, monopoly, oligopoly, etc.; pricing of
productive services; Inter-temporal decision-making; equity, general equilibrium; externalities and public goods. An
attempt has been made to provide an analytical and quantitative background in the fundamentals of microeconomic
analysis.

3. Text Books: Snyder, Chirstopher and Walter Nicholson, Microeconomics Theory: Basic Principles and
Extensions, Cengage Leaming, India Edition (2012 by South-Western).

4, Reference Books:
R1. Koutsoyiannis A, Modern Microeconomics, The MacMillan Press Ltd, Hong Kong, 1982.
R2. Jeffrey M Perloff, Microeconomics, Pearson Education, Addison Wesley Longman (Singapore) Pte. Ltd.,
Delhi, Fourth Edition, 2007

5. Course Plan:

Module No. Lecture Session Reference | Learning outcomes

Introduction Economic Models of economic Models
L3.1: Axioms of Rational Choice and the Chapter 3 Modeling of individual behavior;
concept of utility Measurement of utility; Utility
L3.2: Utility functions for different functions for different
Preferences Preferences
L4.1; Utility maximizations and corner Chapter 4 Determination of optimal
solutions behavior of consumers; Utility
Module II: L4.2;: Lump sum principle Maximization
Economic L4.3:; Expenditure functions
theory of L5.1; Demand functions, factors relating to | Chapter5 Derivation of demand curve,
choice, change in demand change in it due to changes in
L5.2: Calculation of income and prices and income, Compensated
substitution effect Demand Curve, Elasticities,
L5.3: Compensated demand curves and Slutsky Equation, Revealed
functions Preference Theory
L5.4; Revealed Preference theo

L6.1: Gross substitutes and complements Chapter 6 Understanding Demand
L6.2: Composite commodity theorem Relationships among Goods:
Complements and Substitutes.
1

    
Module III:
Production
and Supply

Module IV:
Competitive
Markets

Module V:
Market Power

 

Module VI:
Pricing in
Input Markets
Module VII:

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani

Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

L9.1; Production functions in the short run
and long run

L9.2: Elasticity of substitution and different
production functions

L9.3:; Technical progress and its
measurement

L10.1: Relationship between profit
maximization and cost minimization

L 10.2: Contingent demand for inputs and
firm’s expansion path

L10.3:Relationship between short run and
long run cost curves

L11.1: Relationship between marginal
revenue and elasticity, concept of mark-up
L 11.2: Derivation of short-run supply
function by a price-taking firm

L11.3: Profit maximization and input
demand

L12.1: Derivation of market demand
function and supply function

L12.2: Derivation of shape of Long run
supply function

L 12.3: Application of competitive markets :
Excise taxes

L12.4: Other Applications of competitive
markets

L 13.1: Determination of price and output in | Chapter 13
a general equilibrium setup

L14.1: Monopoly, price and output
determination and profit calculations

L 14.2: Price discrimination: First degree
and second degree, two-part tariffs

L 14.3:T hird-degree price discrimination
L 14.4: Effect of government actions on
monopoly operation

L 15.1: Price and output decision under
monopolistic competition

L15.2: Betrand and cournot model
L15.3: Stackleberg model and dominant
firm model

L8.1; Game theory and cournot model
L8.2: Decision tree

  

Chapter 9
and R1

Derivation of Isoquants; to
examine the behavior of
production functions in the short
run and long run

Measurement of costs in the short
run and long run; derivation of
cost functions from production
relations

Chapter 10
and RI

The alternative modes of
optimizing behavior of the firm;
derivation of the factor demands
from optimizing behavior

Chapter 11

Estimation of market demand and
supply functions in the short run
and long run; market equilibrium
analysis and profit maximization,
application of competitive market

Chapter 12
and R2

 

The competitive price system,
General equilibrium and factor
prices

Study of traditional theory of
monopoly; price discrimination;
pricing and output determination
under monopoly; welfare effects
of monopoly; cost advantages;
government actions; two-part
tariffs

Theories of imperfect
competition; concept of Duopoly
and Oligopoly; pricing and output
determination in Oligopolistic
competition; co-operative and
non-cooperative Oligopoly
models and Stackelberg model;
The Cournot Solution;

Chapter 14

Chapter 15
and 8 and R1

 

L6.1: Concept of monopsony and its Chapter 16 Pricing in Inputs such as Labor
equilibrium Market

L8.1: Asymmetric information

Market Failure | L19.1: Externality and its solution

 

L19.2: Public goods and its characteristics

‘ae 18 & | To examine the situations where
market fails to operate:
Asymmetric information,

  

externalities and public goods
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

 

 

6. Evaluation Scheme:

—o ee lose Book/ O pen Book)

Midsemester Test | -s OpenBook = —s

Tutorial test  —s_ | test a | = OpenBook ~—sd | = OpenBook ~—sd

ee 1 ee ae FN) Partly open book
Examination

7. Chamber Consultation Hour: Tuesday 4 - 5.50PM (6165 — M)
8. Notices: Students must regularly check their BITS e-mail account for course-related announcements/notices.

 

9, Make-up Policy: No make-up shall be granted for the tutorial test and students will get one buffer in tutorial test.

Make-up for the mid-semester test and the comprehensive examination shall be granted only in genuine cases. The
students must avail prior permission or intimate I/C before the exam is held to qualify for the make-up. In any case,
original proofs justifying the absence will have to be furnished.

10. Note (if any): Students must write correct ID numbers, in all the evaluative components, failing which their
answer sheets will not be evaluated.

Instructor-in-charge
Course No. ECON F242
