BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

SECOND SEMESTER 2020-21
COURSE HANDOUT
Date: 17.01.2021
In addition to part I (General Handout for all courses appended to the Time table), this portion gives further

specific details regarding the course.

COURSE NO. : ECON F244
COURSE TITLE : ECONOMICS OF GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT
INSTRUCTOR-IN-CHARGE : DR. RAHUL ARORA

1. Course Description

Economic growth and Economic development: Meaning of growth and development and their importance;
Economic Growth: Theories versus Models of economic growth; Concepts and Methods of growth theory;
Exogenous Growth Models - The Harrod—Domar model, Neoclassical models of growth: One sector and Two
sector; Technical Progress: representation, classification, measurement, transmission, and its endogenous
form; Economic Development: Theories of Economic Development; Problems and Policies related to —
Poverty & Inequality, Population growth, and Environment; Globalization: International Trade, Institutions,

and economic development

2. Scope and Objective of the C ourse

The main objective is to understand the actual meaning of economic growth and economic development. This
would be done by studying various models of economic growth, theories of economic development, and their
relevance & applications. The knowledge of theories and models would help the students to better understand
the entire economic system and its growth over time. The application part will be covered by the ‘project
component’ which includes empirical testing of various hypotheses related to growth and development. This
would help the students to better understand the current issues in economic development and growth. Overall,

this course would lay foundation for the students to understand the real issues in economic development.

3. Text Book

TB1 — Jones, Hywel G., An Introduction to Modern Theories of Economic Growth, McGraw-Hill,
Republished in 1976.

TB2-— Ray, Debraj, Development Economics, Oxford University Press, New Delhi, 17" impression, 2010.
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

 

 

4, Reference Books
e R1-—Todaro, M.P. and Smith, S.C., Economic Development, 12" Edition, 4” impression, 2019.
e R2-Thirlwall, A.P., Economics of Development, Palgrave Macmillan, 9" Edition, Reprinted in 2018.
e R3— Gupta, K.R., Economic Growth Models, Atlantic Publishers, 2014.

5. Course Plan

Lecture/Tutorial Reference Text

1. Economi W n , Introducto Understandin of
a 0 c growth and L1.1: Course Introduction and Course ly g
Economic development: | ,... | .. PPT course contents and
Initial discussion oe ee
An Introduction their siqnificance

L2.1: Economic growth:
Theories, Models, & Reality
2. Concepts related to | L2.2: Concepts & Methods of
Economic Growth Models | Growth Theory Chapter 1 & 2 (TB1)
& Class notes

Knowledge of
preliminary
concepts related to

Tutorial 1: Practice of concepts growth models

used in growth theo

L3.1-2: The Harrod Model of
economic growth

L3.3: The Domar Model of
economic growth

Tutorial 2: Practice questions on
HD model = and _ Project

Assignment topics distribution Understanding of

Chapter 3-5 (TB1) | exogenous growth
and Class notes models and growth
processes

3. Exogenous growth

models L3.4-6: Neoclassical one sector

model of growth
L3.7-9: Neoclassical two sector
model of growth

Tutorial 3: Statistical Software
and Database Usage for project
assignment

L4.1-2: Representation and
classification

L4.3: Technical Progress in
growth models

L4.4: Measurement of technical
progress

L4.5-6: Transmission of
technical progress and
endogenous form of technical

Knowledge of
Chapter 7, 8, & 9) concepts related to
(TB1) and Class | technical progress
notes and their usage in

growth models

4. Technical Progress

 
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

Tutorial — 4 and 5: Empirics
related to growth models

L5.1: Rostow Stages
Economic Growth and HD Model
L5.2-3: Theories of structural
changes

Understanding of
Chapter 3 — 4 (R1) | classical theories of
and Class notes economic

development

5. Theories of Economic
Development

Tutorial 6: Discussion on factors

affecting economic development

L6.1: Measurement of inequality

L6.2: Poverty measurement
6. Poverty, Inequality and | L6.3: Indices for measuring other | Chapter 5 (R11)
development parameters of development and Class notes

Tutorial 7: Empirical exercise

L7.1-2: Theories and _ issues
7. Population growth and | related to development Chapter 6 (R1)
development and Class notes Major isles in

Tutorial 8: Empirical exercise seek ‘om nt nd

a

development related to development Class notes

L9.1: Trade and Development
9, Globalization: | L9.2: International Institutions &
International Trade, | Development Chapter 11 & 12
Institutions and economic (R1) and Class notes
development Tutorial 9: Technical details

related to international trade

L10.1-7: Two to _ three
10. Group Presentations _| presentations per lecture/tutonial | Group Research
(Group of 4 students)

Knowledge on

Estimation
economic
models/theones

 

Tutorial 10 & 11; Presentations

6. Evaluation Scheme

Duration . Max. . Nature of

11" Feb 2021

nk

Apa 2021 | poneton
Project [Report + "et 10 % 9" A pril (Open Book)
Presentation] [5 +5] [10 +10] Onwards P
Xamination

* Dates are tentative and subject to change as per the circumstances. Any change will be communicated
well in advance.

 
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

 

7. Consultation Hour:
Students can approach me any time via email (rahul.arora@ pilani.bits-pilani.ac.in). Their queries will be
answered through email/online meeting/phone call as per the level of the query.

8. Notices
For course related announcements, please check your email regularly. All the information will also be
communicated during the class.

9, Make-up Policy

Make-up for the Mid-Sem and Comprehensive examinations shall be granted only in genuine cases after
thorough examination of the application. Only those requests would be entertained for thorough examination
who have applied prior or within the day of exam with valid reason. Please do not make any request after the
application period is over. Those requests would not be entertained. The conduct of make-up (platform of
taking make-up, type of questions, and time of make-up) is to be decided by the Instructor-In-Charge only.
Student has no right to interfere in this policy. Also, no make-up request shall be considered for the
Quizzes.

10. Note
Evaluative components will be conducted during scheduled hours as specified. Changes, if any, will be
communicated well in advance. Please quote your ID number and name before requesting anything related to
the course. The arrangement of internet facility and required gadgets is on the students to access the live
classes and class material.
Instructor-in-charge
ECON F244
