 

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

 

FIRST SEMESTER 2020-21
COURSE HANDOUT
Date: 18-1-2021

In addition to part -I (General Handout for all courses appended to the time-table) this portion gives
further specific details regarding the course.

Course No. : ECON F212

Course Title : FUNDAMENTALS OF FINANCE & ACCOUNTING
Instructor-in-charge : Dr. Byomakesh Debata

Instructor : Dr. Byomakesh Debata

1. Course description:
Accounting is the language of business. Through this language, the business (i.e. the Company) not

only maintain the records of transactions it undertakes during the course of its existence, but also
communicates with the outside world by publishing various financial reports that summarize
transactions undertaken by the company. Therefore, it is important to note here that this course entails
two important and interrelated aspects, i.e.,

a. Recording transactions, and

b. Preparing financial statements such as balance sheet, income statement, etc.
Since, b. follows a., it is important to learn the recording of transactions first in order to learn
preparing financial statements.
The course will introduce you to the following key concepts: introduction, standards and basic rules of
accounting, double-entry accounting system, identifying and recoding transactions, preparing trial
balance, dealing with incomplete transactions, preparing the balance sheet, types of ownership,
credibility and role of auditing, measuring income, adjustments to the accounts, preparing the
statement of cash flows, recording sales revenue, reporting inventones and cost of goods sold,
recording capital assets, liabilities and interest, stockholders' equity and valuation of financial assets.
This course is specifically designed to meet the educational needs of second year Economics students
and students pursing Finance minor program. In order to complete the program requirement, the
students from Economics and Finance background require a basic understanding on accounting
principles and financial statement analysis. This course serves that purpose, and it is prerequisite to
other advanced courses that students from (MSc) Economics and Finance (minor) undertake in the
Subsequent semesters. Hence, being elementary in nature this course has got its relevance and
importance. Besides, a few students also take this course as an elective in order to pursue their
academic interest in the field of finance.

Save Paper.
gy. Save Trees.
** “Save the World. innovate achieve ~—siea

Please Do Not Print Unless Necessary

 
 

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

 

2. Scope and Objective:

The scope of this course largely encapsulates an introduction to the reporting system used by
businesses to record and convey financial information to investors, analysts, and regulators. This
reporting system is referred to as financial accounting. The key learning objectives that this course
accomplishes enables participants in learning:

a. how companies identify and record transactions that have a financial impact and are critical
to day-to-day functioning of the company.

b. how using a systematic procedure, the recorded transactions are summarized into
meaningful and standardized reports (financial statements) such as the balance sheet,
statement of income etc.

c. the key components that form part of these financial statements.

d. how these financial statements are analyzed and what information do they convey about the
financial well-being and future prospects about the company.

3. Textbook: The below given text-book (prefer 11 Edition) is highly recommended for this course.
TB1: Horngren, Sundem, Elliott and Philbrick, “Introduction to Financial Accounting”,
Pearson Education India Ltd., 11 edition, 2018.

4. Ref. Books:
R1: Libby, Robert., Libby, Short, “Financial Accounting”, Tata McGraw-Hill., 6" edition, 2011
R2: R Narayanaswamy, Financial Accounting: A managerial perspectives, 6th edition, PHI 2017
R3: Gitman, “Principles of Managerial Finance,” Pearson Education, 10" ed, 2004

 

A Save Paper.
ge, Save Trees.
£°* Save the World.

innovate

Please Do Not Print Unless Necessary
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

 

 

5. This section provides a details description of the course contents that will be dealt with in this
course. Also, the dates of tutorial tests and regular tests are also given so that participants can
plan accordingly.

Course Plan

Module Lecture session References | Learning objectives
Number

1. Introduction
to the concept
of a business
entity,
transaction
analysis, and
financial
statements.

Textbook
Chapter 1
and Class

L1.1 - Course introduction and discussion
on handout.

L1.2 - Concept of a business enterprise.
Types of ownerships. Notes
L1.3 - Key terminologies related to

financial statements.

L1.4 - Discussion on transactions and how

to identify transactions that hold

Differentiate between
types of business
entities.

Learning the concept of
transaction from
accounting point of
view.

Understanding the

 

relevance to the business. Transaction concept of business

analysis using balance sheet accounts. entity.
L1.5 - Introduction to the concept of
accounting and its end product i.e. the

Annual Report

Textbook Learn distinction
Chapter 2

and Class

2. Income L2.1 Income measurement within an

measurement accounting period. Revenues vs Expenses. between revenues and

and financial L2.2 Relationship between stockholder's expenses.

performance. equity and profits and losses of a Notes Describe the change in

company. balance sheet from
L2.3-4 Accrual versus cash basis of beginning of the year to
measuring income, matching principle, the end of year in terms
and expiration of unexpired assets. of income statement
L2.5 - Income statement and its during that period.
relationship with the balance sheet

L2.6 - Dividends, retained earnings, and

statement of stockholder's equity

L2.7 - Popular financial ratios for financial

analysis and investment decision making

 

 

A Save Paper.
gy) Save Trees.
£ P= &Save the World.

innovate

Flot al (otic) |

Please Do Not Print Unless Necessary
   

3. Recording
transactions

4. End-of-period
adjustments for

preparing
financial

statements

5. Statement of

Cash Flows

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani

Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

L3.1-2 Double entry accounting system
(concept of journal entries, general
ledger, and debit/credit).

L3.3-5 Process of developing financial
statements from journal entries

L3.6 - Effect of errors on financial
statements and how to correct.

L4.1 Revisit accrual-based accounting
procedure

L4.2-3 Types of adjustments and why it is
needed

L4.4 Preparing adjusted financial
statements using unadjusted financial
statements and accrual-based accounting
approach.

L4.5 Introduction to classified balance
sheet and various forms of balance sheet
presentation

L4.6 Single and multi-step income
statement

L4.7-8 Ratio analysis using balance sheet
and income statement

L5.1 Introduction to cash flow statement
and its relevance for managers and
investors.L5.1 Activities that affect cash
flow statementL5.2-4 Indirect and direct
method for preparing cash flow
statementL5.5 Cash flow statement and
financial analysis.

Save Paper.
ae) Save Trees.
£ > Save the World.

Textbook
Chapter 3
and Class
Notes

Textbook
Chapter 4
and Class
Notes

Textbook
Chapter 5
and Class
Notes

Please Do Not Print Unless Necessary

Explain changes in
balance sheet after
every transaction in
terms of debit and
credit.

Prepare year-end or
quarter-end unadjusted
financial statements by
using information on
transaction data
undertaken by the
company during that
period

Distinguish between
cash-based accounting
system and accrualbased accounting
system.

Prepare year-end or
quarter-end adjusted
financial statements by
using information on
unadjusted financial
statements and
incorporating end-ofperiod adjustments.

Realize the importance
of the cash flow
statement.Categorize
any given transaction
into either investing,
financing, or operating
actvity.Utilize
information given in the
balance sheet and
income statement for

 

innovate
 

Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

6. Long-lived L6.1 Types of long-lived assets. Difference

Assets between tangible and intangible assets.
(Tentative) L6.2 Straight line depreciation and effects
of depreciation on cash flow and income
tax

L6.3 Expenditure after acquisition.
Accounting perspective on recording gain

and loss on sale of tangible assets.

7. Liabilities and
Interest

L7.1 Review of accounting for current
liabilities

(Tentative) L7.2-3 Long-term Liabilities. Discussion on
how companies raise financing by issuing
bonds. Bond valuation method.

L7.3-4 Bond accounting

L7.5-6 Accounting for leases

8. Shareholder's
equity

L8.1 Issuing stocks by public companies
for raising funds from investors.
(Tentative) L8.2 Accounting for common stocks,

dividends, and retained earnings.

Save Paper.
ae) Save Trees.
£ > Save the World.

Textbook
Chapter 8
and Class
Notes

Textbook
Chapter 9
and Class
Notes

Textbook
Chapter 10
and Class
Notes

 

Please Do Not Print Unless Necessary

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani

preparing cash flow
statement.Compare and
contrast direct and
indirect approaches for
cash flow preparation.

Differentiate between
current assets and fixed
assets.

Role of depreciation in
expiring long-lived
asset.

Distinction between
cash flow on investment
and cash flow on
expenses.

Accounting for
purchase, sale and
expiration of fixed
assets.

Differentiate between
current liabilities and
long-term liabilities
Issuing bonds to
investors by companies
for raising funds.

Bond valuation
principles and bond
accounting.

Stock issuance process
and accounting such
transactions.

Impact of dividend
declaration and
distribution on
company's net worth.

 

innovate
 

   

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

9. Financial L9.1 Review of popular financial ratios Textbook Carry-out

ratio analysis covered in the course. Chapter 12 | comprehensive financial
L9,.2-3-4 Financial statement analysis of a | and Class ratio analysis of a
hypothetical firm using ratio analysis Notes company using financial

approach statements.

Group Assignment and Presentations ee

6. Evaluation Scheme:

Components Weightage Date & Time Nature of component
(% ) (Close Book/ O pen Book)
Mid-Semester Test As per time-table Open Book

Comprehensive A0% As per time-table Partly Open Book

Examination

Quizzes (2)

Presentation

 

Make-up policy

Any problem with internet to be addressed to AUGSD. No make-up will be given for tests without prior
approval from the I/C. Make-up for comprehensive exam will be decided by AUGSD. Make-up for tests or
comprehensive may not be conducted as regular tests due to problem in scheduling and may be done through
Google meet viva-voce or telephonic interview mode.

Chamber Consultation Hour: Thursday- from 4:30PM to 5:30 PM. This can be done through Google meet
or Microsoft team etc.

Notices: Notices concerning the course will be intimated through online.

Instructor in-charge
Byomakesh Debata

 

Save Paper.
ae) Save Trees.
£ > Save the World.

innovate

Please Do Not Print Unless Necessary
