BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

SECOND SEMESTER 2020-21
COURSE HANDOUT
Date: 17.01.2021
In addition to part I (General Handout for all courses appended to the Time table), this portion gives

further specific details regarding the course.

COURSE NO. : ECON F211

COURSE TITLE : PRINCIPLES OF ECONOMICS

INSTRUCTOR-IN-C HARGE : DR. RAHUL ARORA

INSTRUCTOR ; DR. KRISHNA M.

INSTRUCTOR ; DR. GEETILAXMI MOHAPATRA
INSTRUCTOR DR. RAJAN PANDEY

TUTORIAL INSTRUCTORS ; Section specific — to be announced in the class

1. Course Description

This course is a foundation course for the students entering into the discipline of Economics & Finance.
This introductory course teaches the basic concepts related to the economic system that are listed as
follows: Introduction to Economics (Microeconomics) & Economic Problems; Demand, Supply, &
Elasticity; Household Behavior and Consumer choice; The Production Process; Costs and Output
Decisions; Demand for Production Inputs; Market Imperfections: Monopoly, Oligopoly, Monopolistic
Competition; Introduction to Macroeconomics and the Problems; Measurement of National Income &
Output; Money Supply and the Banking System

2. Scope and Objective of the C ourse

The main objective is to introduce the fundamental concepts and tools necessary to acquire an
understanding of economic decision making of market participants such as Individual households, firms,
and the govemment. The course covers two major areas of economics namely Microeconomics and
Macroeconomics. The knowledge of the fundamentals would help the students to better understand the
entire economic system and the process followed in policy making. This course would lay foundation
for the students to understand other related courses in economics & finance such as Mathematical
Economics, International Economics, Advance Micro and Macroeconomics, among others.

3. Text Book
e TB: Case, K.E., Fair, R.C., & Oster, S.E., “Principles of Economics”, Pearson Education
Limited, 12th Edition, 2017

4, Reference Books
e R41: Samuelson, P. A. & Nordhaus, W. D., “Economics”, Tata McGraw-Hill, 19th Edition, 2007
e R2: Lipsey, R. G. & Chrystal, K. A., “Economics”, Oxford University Press, 11th Edition, 2007
e R3: Mankiw, N.G. “Principles of Economics”, South Western/Cengage Learning India, 6th
Edition, 2012
e R4: Acemoglu, D, Laibson, D. & List, J., “Economics”, Pearson Education Limited, 1° Edition,
2016
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

5. Course Plan

 

 

 

 

Lecture/T utorial Reterence
L1.1: Course Orientation & Subject
1. Introduction to | Introduction
Economics & Economic | L1.2: Scarcity, choice and opportunity a 1 and 2
Problems cost
L1.3: Production possibility frontier
L2.1-2: Demand Concepts
2. Demand, Supply, & | L2.3: Supply Concepts Chapters: 3 and 5
Elasticity L2.4: Market equilibrium [TB]
L2.5: Elasticity of Demand
L3.1: Budget constraint and its role
3. Household Behavior and | L3.2-3: Concept of utility including | Chapters: 6 [TB]
Consumer choice DMU
L3.4: Income and Substitution effects
L4.1: Behavior of profit maximizing
, firm in the short and long run Chapters: 7 [TB]
#. The Production Process L4.2: Production process and ,
production function
L5.1: Types of costs
9. Costs and Output | L5.2: Perfect competition, TR & MR_ | Chapters: 8 [TB]
Decisions L5.3: Profit Maximization in perfect
competition
Inputs L6.2: Land Markets
L7.1-2: Capital, Investment, and
Depreciation
. | L7.3: Market Imperfections: An | Chapter: 11 and 13
stonnpaly. LnipeTLecuons Introduction and Price & Output TB]
decisions is pure Monopoly
L7.4: Social Costs of Monopoly
L7.9: Price Discrimination
L8.1: Oligopolistic Market Structure
and various models Chapter: 14 [TB]
8. Market Imperfections: | L8.2: Strategic Interaction: Game | and Class Notes on
Oligopoly Theory - I Game Theory
L8.3: Strategic Interaction: Game
Theory-I]
L9.1: Product Differentiation & Role
9. Market Imperfections: | of Advertisement Chapter: 15 [TB]
Monopolistic Competition | L9.2: Price & Output determination in
Monopolistic Competition
10. Introduction to | L10.1: Introduction to
Problems concems
L11.1-2: GDP: Meaning, concepts,
11. Measurement of and measurement J P Chapter: 21 [TB]

National Income & Output

 

L11.3: Nominal vs. Real GDP

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani

Learning outcome

Basic understanding
of Economics as a
Subject; detailing of
course contents, their
significance; average
consumer behavior in
various market
situations

Understanding _ of
production process
from producer’s side;
cost of inputs and
their supply

of
market
structure and
producer behavior in
each market

Understanding
various

Understanding to the
basics of National
Income accounting,
role of money, and
related concepts

 
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

L12.1-2: Supply of Money & Its
Measurement

L.12.3: The Indian Banking System | Chapter: 25 [TB]

L12.4: Credit Creation

L12.5: Monetary Policy of RBI

* In addition to the referred material, online lecture recordings will be uploaded time to time for the
students’ reference on NALANDA

12. Money Supply and the
Banking System

 

6. Evaluation Scheme: The evaluation platform will be notified well in advance

Max Duration « | Max. Marks Nature of
9 Feb 2021
Tut Test 2 23" Feb 2021
Mid-Sem March 2021 online
% | 30 | 33
Tut Test 3 30 23™ Mar 2021 (Open Book)

Comprehensive

Xam

# Three best tut-tests would be considered for evaluation; * Dates are tentative and subject to change as per the
circumstances. Any change will be communicated well in advance.

a
Tut Test 4 13" Apr 2021

 

7. Consultation Hour:

Students can approach to the Instructor In-Charge any time via email (rahul.arora@ pilani.bitspilani.ac.in). Their queries will be answered through email/online meeting/phone call as per the level of
the query.

8. Notices
For course related announcements, please check your email regularly. All the information will also be
communicated during the class.

9, Make-up Policy

Make-up for the Mid-Sem and Comprehensive examinations shall be granted only in genuine cases after
thorough examination of the application. Only those requests would be entertained for thorough
examination who have applied prior or within the day of exam with valid reason. Please do not make
any request after the application period is over. Those requests would not be entertained. The conduct
of make-up (platform of taking make-up, type of questions, and time of make-up) is to be decided by
the Instructor-In-C harge/instructors only. Student has no right to interfere in this policy. Also, no makeup request shall be considered for the Quizzes because of one quiz in buffer.

10. Note

Evaluative components will be conducted during scheduled hours as specified. Changes, if any, will be
communicated well in advance. Please quote your ID number and name before requesting anything
related to the course. The arrangement of internet facility and required gadgets is on the students to
access the live classes and class material.

Instructor-in-charge
ECON F211
