 

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus

Instruction Division

Second Semester 2020-2021

 

Course Number : EEE F411 (4 unit course)
Course Title : Internet of Things
Instructor-In-Charge : Dr. Vinay Chamola

Note: This course is discipline elective for: Undergraduate level: B.E (EEE), B.E (E&I). For other discipline, it
will be considered as an open elective.

1. Scope and Objective:

This module is designed to provide students with solid technical knowledge and skills to build Internet
of Things (loT) systems. Internet of things has evolved due to convergence of multiple technologies embedded systems, sensor technology, real-time data analytics, machine learning etc. Traditional
fields of embedded systems, wireless sensor networks, control systems, automation (including home
and building automation), and others all contribute to enabling the loT. This course comprehensively
covers various technologies and tools used for enabling loT solutions. Knowledge of various topics
required for building loT prototypes like sensors and actuators/ Communications and networking and
data management is also imparted in this course. This course would also help the students understand
the various loT security challenges and solution to address them. The course will also give the
students exposure to how various real world problems are being solved by loT based solutions (like in
applications for smart city, smart farming etc.). There would also be some hands on sessions where
students would learn how to build and program loT systems and make end-to-end solutions for
different applications. Furthermore, assignments and projects in this course would help students build
loT prototypes and apply what they have learnt in the course to solve real world problems.

2. Text Book:
(T1) Internet of Things: Principles and paradigms. R. Buyya, and A.V Dastjerdi (Elsevier), 2016.
3. Reference Books:

(R1) "Precision - Internet Of Things", by Timothy Chou (Mc Graw Hill), 2017.

(R2) "The Internet of Things: Enabling Technologies, Platforms, and Use Cases", by Pethuru Raj and
Anupama C. Raman (CRC Press), 2017.

(R3) "Internet of Things: A Hands-on Approach", by Arshdeep Bahga and Vijay Madisetti (Universities
Press), 2014.

(R4) “Internet of Things” by Raj Kamal (Mc Graw Hill), 2017.

(R5) IEEE and ACM Transactions.

4. Course Plan

A Save Paper.
ge, Save Trees.
£°* Save the World.

 

innovate

Please Do Not Print Unless Necessary
 

Lectures

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus

Instruction Division

Second Semester 2020-2021

|Module ______| Topics covered Lectures

Module 1: Introduction
to loT

Module 2: Sensors and
Actuators for loT

Module 3:
Programming loT end
points

Module 4: Networking
for loT

Module 5:
Communications and
networking in loT

Module 6: Data
management in loT

Module 7: Security
issues in loT

 

Save Paper.
ae) Save Trees.
£ > Save the World.

Introduction to lol & Cyber-Physical Systems, loT applications
- an overview, Different Levels of loT Applications : Level 1 - 6
with examples, loT Design Methodology & Life Cycle,
Introduction to loT Physical End Points & Platforms, loT
System Design Examples (for applications like fitness tracker,
smart parking etc.).

Introduction to sensors for loT application development, Data
Acquisition, Signal Conditioning and Processing, Multi Sensor
fusion for loT, Advanced sensing techniques (e.g. BCI/HCI),
Actuators and Controllers for loT

Introduction to Arduino microcontroller & NodeMCU for loT
applications, Programming with Arduino & NodeMCU and
prototype development (e.g. for smart farming, smart city
applications etc.), Introduction to Raspberry Pi, Programming
Raspberry Pi (Python), Rest API based hands on.

Wireless sensor networks: Introduction, Deployment,
Localization, Routing, MAC, Time synchronization and Multisensor-fusion for WSN

Ad Hoc networks (MANET, VANET, FANET), Industrial loT
Networks, Common network standards (Bluetooth, NEC,
LORA) etc., COAP and MQTT (including lab/ hands-on)

Data Management for loT, Advanced optimization for
processing sensor data, Machine learning for loT data
analytics, Introduction to loT Cloud Services, Case studies of
Cloud services for loT and learning how to use them.

Cyber-attacks on loT- Case study, Security solutions for loT:
hardware/software

innovate

Please Do Not Print Unless Necessary

Lecture 1Lecture 4

Lecture 5 Lecture 8

Lecture 8Lecture 18

Lecture 18 Lecture 23

Lecture 24-31

Lecture 32-36

Lecture 37 Lecture 40

 

 
 

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus

Instruction Division

Second Semester 2020-2021

 

Lab for the course would be in-class labs during the class hours when the relevant topics are covered. Labs
would consist of hands on session where the students will learn how to work with microcontrollers and
raspberry pi and learn building loT applications from the scratch. Some of the suggested lab exercises are:

e Programming Arduino/ Nodemcu (esp8266) microcontrollers.

e Blinking LED using the above microcontrollers.

e Interfacing sensors to microcontrollers.

e Connecting microcontrollers to the internet and streaming sensor data to cloud.
e Actuation using microcontrollers.

e Raspberry pi programming and application development.

e Rest API based hands on.

e Lab exercise based on COAP/ MQTT.

Evaluation Scheme:

Component Weightage (% ) Date & Time

_ Lab Test 1 hour 20 Based on the
lab exercises
Project (Prototype Will be 25 Continuous Evaluation
implementation) announced
Comprehensive 120mins 30 TBA
Examination

Chamber C onsultation Hour: To be announced in Class.

 

Notices: A1l notices regarding the course will be mailed.

Make-up Policy: No make-up without prior permission.

Instructor-in-charge

 

A Save Paper.
ee) Save Trees.
£°* Save the World.

innovate

Please Do Not Print Unless Necessary
