BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

SECOND SEMESTER 2020-21
COURSE HANDOUT

 

Date: 04.01.2021

In addition to part I (General Handout for all courses appended to the Time table) this portion gives further specific
details regarding the course.

Course No : EEE/INSTR F342

Course Title : Power Electronics

Instructor-in-C harge : Rajneesh Kumar

Instructor (s) : Ashish Patel, Dheerendra Singh, H D Mathur, Aditya R Gautam

1. Course Description: This course covers basic power electronic circuits which includes DC-DC converters, Rectifiers
and Inverters. Steady state analysis of these converters is discussed in details with emphasis on proper selection of
devices and magnetic components. Mathematical modeling of converter transfer function using various approaches is
also included for controller design of these converters. Experiments are designed to understand the working of these
power electronic circuits supported with MA TLAB/SIMULINK based simulation platform.

2. Scope and Objective of the C ourse:

a. Understand the main elements of power electronic circuits

b. Steady-state analysis of basic power electronic circuits like DC-DC converters, rectifiers and inverters
c. Development of converter transfer function to locate pol-zero for controller design

d. Experimental validation of these power electronic circuits

e. Development of one lab prototype power electronic circuit

3. Text Books:
T1: N. Mohan, T. Undeland, and W. Robbins, Power Electronics: Converters, Applications, and Design, 3" edit. John
Wiley & Sons, 2003

T2: Robert W. Erickson, Dragan Maksimovic, Fundamental Power Electronics: 2° edit. Springer International, 2001
4, Reference Books:
Ri: J. Kassakian, M. Schlecht, and G. Verghese, Principles of power electronics, 3™ edit. Pearson, 2012

R2: P. Krein, Elements of power electronics, 2™ edit. Oxford university press, 2011
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

5. Course Plan

Module No. Lecture

Session
1. Elements of Power LO-L3
Electronics

Reference
)

T2 (4.1-3);
R1(24.1-3)

 

2. DC-DC converters:
Buck, Boost, Buck-boost,
Flyback, SEPIC, Cuk and

other derived converters

5. Modeling and Control

of power converters

T2(7.1-5,
8.2-3, 9.1-5)

L29-L35

L36-L40

6. Practical converter

design considerations and

R1(24.1-3)
T2(14.1-2,
15.1-2), class

notes

advanced converter

design

6. Evaluation Scheme:

(% )

Tatonasenizms |
= |
assignments
7. Chamber C onsultation Hour: Will be announced
8. Notices: EEE notice board

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani

Learning outcomes

SPST switch realization using semiconductor devices
(MOSFET, Diode and IGBT) for various converter
topologies. Analysis of switching losses.

Steady state converter analysis in CCM and DCM with

loss analysis. Converter component design for a given

  

voltage and current ripple

Analysis of converter transfer function using various
approaches. Effect of negative feedback on the network
transfer function

Design of filter and coupled inductor; Gate driver,
Snubber circuits and signal generators. Soft switching

converters

Nature of component
(Close Book/ Open Book)
Close book/open book
Close book/ open book
During tutorial hours Close book/ open book
25% During Lab sessions Open book/ open book

9, Make-up Policy: Will be given ONLY for genuine cases with prior permission

2
ST
(9)

A BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
= Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

 

10. Note (if any): Laboratory experiment details will be provided in the Lab during practical sessions.

Instructor-in-charge
EEE/INSTR F342
