BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

SECOND SEMESTER 2020-21
COURSE HANDOUT
Date: 16.01.2021

In addition to part I (General Handout for all courses appended to the Time table) this portion gives further
specific details regarding the course.

Course No : EEE G592

Course Title : Mobile & Personal C ommunication
Instructor-in-C harge : Dr. Sandeep J oshi

Instructor(s) :

Tutorial/Practical Instructors: Dr. Sandeep J oshi
1. Course Description:

History of mobile radio; the mobile radio signal environment; review of statistical techniques; pathover flat
as well as hilly terrain; effects of RF system design on propagation; received signal envelope and phase
characteristics; modulation schemes employed; functional design of mobile radio systems, diversity schemesSpace; frequency and polarization diversity; mobile radio system functional design; signal error analysis versus
performance criteria; multiple access schemes; classification of the concepts of sensitive topics; new concepts
data transmission via cellular; spectrum and technology of WLL.

2. Scope and Objective of the C ourse:

a) To equip the students with a comprehensive knowledge of the fundamentals and latest developments
in the cellular, mobile, and personal communication technologies along with an overview of the
emerging personal communication technologies.

To develop foundations of research in the field of wireless communications.

To understand the theory of different wireless propagation environments, fading phenomenon, and
design of wireless communication systems.

To be able to design and simulate the wireless communication systems.

The latest topics in the wireless communications will be introduced with a research focus.

QO oO
—_—TwJ

22

3. Text Books:

1. “Wireless Communications”, A. Goldsmith, Cambridge Univ. Press, 2005.
2. “Wireless Communications: Principles and Practice”, by T.S. Rappaport, 2nd ed., Prentice Hall, 2002.

4, Reference Books:

‘Fundamentals of Wireless Communication”, D. Tse and P. Viswanath, Cambridge Univ. Press, 2005.
“Wireless Communications & Networks”, William Stallings, Pearson Education, Asia, 2002.
“Modern Wireless Communications”, S. Haykin and M. Moher, Pearson Education, 2005.

“Mobile Cellular Telecommunications Systems”, WCY Lee, McGraw Hill International Ed., 1990.
‘Digital Communications over Fading Channels”, M.K. Simon and M.-S. Alouini, 2™ Ed., Wiley:
2005.

“Principles of Mobile Communication “, G.L. Stuber, Springer. 4" Ed., 2017.

1 be I

Si
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

5. Course Plan:

 

Module Lecture Coverage Learning outcomes
Session

Introduction

Cellular
Concept

Mobile Radio
Propagation

Modulation and
Coding
Techniques for
Mobile

Communications

Wireless
Networks and
standards

New trends in
wireless
networks

Introduction to wireless and _ mobile
communications: history and evolution, future
trends-5G and beyond 5G

Overview of basic communications system:
block diagram, functionality, and introduction
to wireless networks

Spectrum: frequency bands, frequency
allocation, new bands-mm Wave, THz

Multiple access schemes-OMA, NOMAduplexing, and switching

Frequency reuse, cell splitting, handoff,
channel assignment, interference
characterization, performance metrics:
capacity, SNR and SINR, coverage, outage

Comparison of old and new cellular
architectures, cross layer adaptations

Mobile radio environment: indoor and
outdoor, channel characteristics: coherence
time/frequency, Doppler spread, Jake’s model

Propagation models: reflection, scattering,
diffraction, large-scale fading, multipath
fading, statistical models, Poisson point
processes

Digital modulation schemes, spread spectrum,
and performance analysis in fading channels

Equalization and diversity techniques

Coding techniques: STBC, Turbo

Wireless networks, MAC layer scheduling,
queueing theory analysis, DECT and CDMA
WLL, UMTS, GSM, CDMA (IS-95), CDMA
2000, PCS, ISM band communication, WLAN,
WPAN, Bluetooth,WiMAX, LTE

Introduction to: OFDM, MIMO, Cooperative
communications, D2D communications, and
AI in wireless communications

Ch-1 (T1,
T2, R1) and
class notes

Ch-3 (T2)
and class
notes

Ch-2, 3 (T1)
Ch-4, 5 (T2)
and class
notes

Ch-5, 6, 7, 8
(T1), Ch -6,

7, 8 (T2) and
class notes

Ch-10 (T1)
and class
notes

Class notes
and
Research
papers

 

Students will learn the
overview and the
classification of various
generations of mobile
communications,
technology, and future
trends

Concepts which form
the basis of mobile
communications will be
discussed along with
the architectural
changes in the network

Wireless channel
characterization and
aspects of fading which
defines the wireless
channel will be covered
in detail

Students will learn the
modulation and coding
schemes used in the
mobile communications
along with diversity
concepts

Students will learn the
basics of — wireless
networks and _ their
design/architecture
aspects

Students will be
introduced to the new
trends in the mobile
networks which will
open research areas to
explore
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

 

6. Evaluation Scheme:

Component Duration | Weightage Date & Time Nature of component
(% ) ———* lose Book/ O pen Book)
Mid-Semester Test Closed Book

Lab evaluation a To “To be announce in ess announced in class Open Book
‘Termpaper To be announced in class Open Book

Comprehensive aE Min. 39 Closed Book
Examination

7. Chamber Consultation Hour: To be announced in the class
8. Notices: All notices will be put up in the classroom link

9, Make-up Policy: No make-up will be given for surprise quizzes, however for other components; make-up
will be given ONLY in cases of sickness (hospitalization). In such cases, students must produce sufficient
proof or must have taken the prior permission from the Instructor.

10. Note (if any):

Instructor-in-charge
Course No. EEE G592
