BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

SECOND SEMESTER 2020-21
COURSE HANDOUT
Date: 16.08.2021

In addition to part I (General Handout for all courses appended to the Time table) this portion gives further
specific details regarding the course.

Course No : EEE/INSTR F244

Course Title : Microelectronic Circuits

Instructor-in-C harge : ANU GUPTA

Instructor(s) : Samtha Benedict

Tutorial/Practical Instructors: Nitin C haturvedi, Pankaj Arora, Sharda Tripathi, K .Babu Ravi Teja,
Samtha Benedict

1. Course Description: Basic microelectronic circuit analysis and design, biasing in discrete and integrated
circuit amplifiers, an overview of modeling of microelectronic devices single and two transistor amplifier
configurations with passive and active loads; current mirrors & current sources; single-ended and differential
linear amplifiers , differential and multistage amplifiers; 2 stage CMOS OPAMP, frequency response of
amplifiers; negative feedback in amplifiers, R-C frequency compensation.

2. Scope and Objective of the C ourse:

The objective of this course is to develop an ability to analyze and design integrated electronic circuits.
The course aims at thorough understanding of electronic circuits & building blocks necessary for
effective realizations of integrated circuits. The course also includes the usage of SPICE as a circuit
design aid.
Objectives of the Course:

e Understand device modelling, two port network models, amplifier characterization parameters

e Understand the necessity of and techniques to set DC bias, Quiescent point location for different types
of amplifiers.

e Understand analysis and synthesis of different single/ multi stage amplifiers and their characterization.

e Practice EDA tools in design of amplifiers.

3. Text Book: Adel. S. Sedra, Kenneth C Smith, “Microelectronic Circuits”, Oxford University Press,
Seventh Edition.

4, Reference Books:

Prime Reference Book/s: Behzad Razavi, “Design of Analog CMOS Integrated Circuits”, TATA McGRAW
Hill, 2001.

Other reference books :

a. Richard. C. Jaeger, “Microelectronic Circuit Design”, Tata McGraw-Hill Companies Inc.,
International Edition.
b. R.Jacob.Baker, Harry.W.Li, David.Boyce, “CMOS circuit Design Layout and simulation. "IEEE Press
series on Microelectronic Systems, PHI.
1
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

5. Course Plan:

Approx. | Module Lecture Session Reference Learning
No. of From the Text Book Outcomes
Lecture (Article) Student will be able to -
Introduction Review of circuit analysis | Revision from Strengthening of concepts
Review of circuit techniques previous courses of previous courses
analysis techniques:
Superposition,
Thevenin and
Norton Theorems.
Two Port Theory of two port | Reference Book ( c) Understanding/
Networks: network models configuration of two port
Z,Y ,H,G,ABCD, network models of any
Cascaded networks. circuit.
Introduction to Basic performance | Text chapter-1 1.4, | Characterize an
Amplifiers measures of Amplifiers, ) | 1.5, 1.6 Amplifier performance
Amplifiers: Terminology, | Text Ch 6
Topologies, concept of
Stability and negative
feedback (qualitative
treatment only)
Basic building Models of MOSFET, Text Ch- 4, 5 Understand MOS/ BJT
blocks: BJT , Overview-physics of | Prime Ref -chapter 2 | device characteristics,
MOSFET , MOSFET, BJT models
operation region
and small signal
models.
Revision of
MOSFET/ BJT
devices operation
Voltage biasing and/| PrimeRef—ch. 3,5 | Design basic IC
DC Biasing and current _biasing--Passive | ch. 7, MOSFET Amplifier
Bias point stability: | and active current mirrors. | Text Ch.6 Ch 7—
Biasing using 7.1—7.3

resistors, current Integrated circuit BJT | TextCho6 Differentiate between
mirrors (basic, Amplifiers, frequency | Ch. 6 Discrete and IC BJT
cascode, low response and BJT models Amplifier Design

voltage cascode) Integrated circuit | Prime Ref Ch. 3, 6 Designing of DC bias
MOSFET Amplifier | Text Ch. 6, 7,9 circuits

Single stage circuits, and Frequency

amplifier design response

Frequency response
of amplifiers

 
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

Differential Differential amplifiers Prime Ref -Ch. 4 Designing differential
Amplifier Text --Ch.7 amplifiers

Multistage high Operational Amplifiers | Prime Ref ch-9 Design and
gain Operational design Text Ch.9 characterization of an
Amplifiers integrated OP-A MP

 

Feedback Impact of negative | Prime Ref ch-8 Apply Concept of
Amplifiers feedback on performance | Text Ch. 10 feedback in feedback
of amplifiers amplifier-design, analysis

Stability & frequency | Prime Ref ch.-10, 7 Apply Techniques for
Feedback compensation in OP AMP, | Text Ch-10 Stability of opamp in
topologies Noise (only qualitative) feedback mode.

Configuration of Feedback
amplifiers Text Ch-12
Example/s of integrated Filter, oscillator, Building of electronic
electronic systems— An _ | signal generator, systems
overview wave shaping
circuits, tuned
amplifiers

 

6. Evaluation Scheme:

Component Duration | Marks/ Date & Time Nature of component
Weightage (Close Book/ Open Book)
(% )
Mid-Semester Test 90 Min. <TEST 1> OB
(30%)
Regular Quiz 50 Spread throughout the OB
(Weekly Tutorial Regular (16.6%) semester
hour)
5

SPICE Assignments Spread
and/ or quiz,

 

5 To be announced and OB
throughout (18.3%) conducted/ evaluated

the

semester

Comprehensive 2 Hr. 105 <TEST C> OB/CB
Examination (35%)

during the semester

  
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

7. Chamber C onsultation Hour: To be announced in the class. May Contact IC to fix a time.

Email--anug@ pilani.bits-pilani.ac.in
8. Notices: A ll notices related to the course will be put on the EEE Notice board/ NALANDA (online portal).

9, Make-up Policy: Makeup will be given only on genuine basis. Prior permission from instructor is necessary

10. Note (if any):

Instructor-in-charge
Course No. EEE/INSTR F244
