BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

 

SECOND SEMESTER 2020-2021

COURSE HANDOUT
Date: 18-01-2021

In addition to part | (General Handout for all courses appended to the Time table) this portion gives further
Specific details regarding the course.

Course No > EEE F243 /INSTR F243

Course Title > SIGNALS AND SYSTEMS

Instructor-in-C harge : Dr. Anantha Krishna Chintanpalli

Instructor(s) : Dr. Anantha Krishna Chintanpalli, Dr. Pawan K. Ajmera

Tutorial/Practical Instructors : Dr. Anantha Krishna Chintanpalli, Dr. Pawan K. Ajmera, Dr. Praveen
Kumar A V, Dr. Sainath Bitragunta, Dr. Sujan Yenuganti, Dr. Shishir
Maheshwari

1. Course Description: This course is intended to provide a comprehensive coverage of Signals and
Systems, a fundamental subject of Electrical Engineering. The topics covered are: Continuous-time and
discrete-time signals and systems, convolution, properties of linear time-invariant (LTI) systems, Fourier
series, Fourier transform, Laplace transform, z-transform, system analysis, frequency response, analog
filters, Sampling and reconstruction.

2. Scope and Objective of the Course: This course is a fundamental course in which the basics of signals
and systems are covered. It deals with the basic transforms, that are essential for signal processing related
applications. Apart from the regular lecture series, the weekly tutorial session will assist the students for a
better understanding of the concepts. The evaluation components include quizzes (conducted during the
tutorial hours) and exams. The students are required to review the following mathematical topics: Calculus,
vector analysis, coordinate systems, arithmetic and geometric progression, probability and complex
variables.

3. Text Books:
T1: B. P. Lathi, “Signal Processing & Linear Systems”, Oxford University Press, 2" edition, 2009.
T2: |. J. Nagrath and S. N. Sharan, “Signals and Systems,” TMH, 2" edition, 2009.

4. Reference Books:

R1: A. V. Oppenheim, A. S. Willsky with S. H. Nawab, Signals and Systems, Pearson India Education
Services, Second Edition, 2015.

R2: M.]. Roberts, Signals and Systems: Analysis using Transform Methods and MATLAB, Tata McGrawHill Publishing Company Limited, Second Edition, 2003.

5. Course Plan:

Module No. | Lecture Session Reference | Learning outcomes

2. (2-5) Classifications; Mathematical Representation; | T1-1.1to1.5 | Understand the

Elementary signals: Unit Impulse, Unit Step, | 2 8+! 84 | fundamental signals
Unit Ramp, and Exponential; Transformations of Ri-t.T'0 14 | used in continuous-time

(CT) and discrete-time

(DT) representations.

. (6-8) Basic System Properties (Causality, Stability, | 11-1.0to1.8 / Understand the various

Time-Invariance, Linearity, Invertibility, systems | + 8-> properties associated

with and without memory); Interconnections of Ri-t9 f0 1.8 | with CT and DT

systems. systems.

the Independent Variable.
3

 
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

Unit Impulse Response; Convolution Sum and | T1-2.1 to 2.4

Convolution Integral Representation; Properties
of LTI systems.
Fourier Series Representation for periodic
Signals and its convergence; Properties of
Fourier Series.

CT Fourier Transform and its Properties;
continuous-time LT| System characterizations
using the differential equations.

Laplace Transform and it properties, Region of
Convergence; LTI System characterizations.

ch2, ch9

- ch3, ch10
- 3.1 to 3.8

Understand the
concepts of convolution
in CT and DT domains.

Understand the
concepts of Fourier
series for periodic
Signals in CT and DT
domains.
Understand the
concepts of Fourier
Transform for CT
Signals.

Understand the
concepts of stability with

respect to ROC for CT
LT|l systems.
Understand the concept
of Sampling.

Conversion from CT signals to DT signals using - chs

the sampling theorem; Aliasing, Reconstruction a lee
of Signals; Effect of Under Sampling.

DT Fourier Transform and its Properties;
discrete-time LTI System characterization using

the difference equations.

Understand the
concepts of Fourier
Transform for DT
Signals.

Understand the
concepts of stability with
respect to ROC for DT
LT|I systems.

10. (34-37) | z-transform and it properties, Region of
Convergence; LTI System characterization;

Hardware implementations (Direct form-| and II)

11. (38-40) | Random Signals and Systems

 

6. Evaluation Scheme:

Component Weightage Date & Time | Nature of component
(200 marks) (Close Book/ Open
Book)

Mid-Semester Test Open Book

Comprehensive Examination = FN Open/closed Book

Quizzes (Total = 3) ,
Best of 2 Quizzes 20 Mins 20% TBA

MATLAB Assignment 0% TBA Open Book

7. Chamber Consultation Hour:

Open Book

 

8. Notices: Notices regarding the course will be displayed only on NALANDA.

9, Make-up Policy: No make-up will be given for Quizzes, however for other components; make-up will be
given ONLY in extremely genuine cases. In such cases, the student must produce the sufficient proof or
must have taken the prior permission from the IC.

10. Note (if any):

Instructor-in-charge
Course No. EEE/INSTR F243
