Wa BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

SECOND SEMESTER 2020-21
COURSE HANDOUT
Date: 01.01.2021

In addition to part I (General Handout for all courses appended to the Time table) this portion gives further
specific details regarding the course.

Course No : EEE/INSTR F432
Course Title : Medical Instrumentation
Instructor-in-C harge : SUJAN YENUGANTI
Instructor(s) ¢ saneee--
Tutorial/Practical Instructors: --------
1. Course Description: Basic components of bio-medical instruments, bio-electric signals & recording
electrodes, transducers, recording and display devices. Patient care and monitoring systems, cardiovascular
measurements-blood pressure, blood flow, cardiac output, heart sounds etc.; instrumentation for respiratory
and nervous systems, analysis of EEG, ECG, EMG, EOG and action potentials, non- invasive diagnostic
measurements - temperature, ultrasonic diagnosis, CAT scan techniques, sensory measurements-motor
response, analysis of behaviour etc. biotelemetry, biofeedback, clinical laboratory instruments, X-ray
diagnosis. Recent advances in biomedical instrumentation- microprocessor based systems, lasers & optical
fiber based systems.

2. Scope and Objective of the Course: This course will cover various systems of the human physiology,
signals of biological origin obtained from these systems, biosensors, transducers, bio electrodes used to
acquire such signals, and amplifiers for measuring bio potentials. Electrical safety of medical devices;
measurements of the blood pressure, blood flow, respiratory system, clinical laboratory equipment, medical
imaging, and bioethics will also be discussed. As a result, students can understand, design and evaluate
systems and devices that can measure, test and/or acquire biological information from the human body. The
course is divided into four modules, wherein, the first module deals with fundamentals of medical instruments
and will cover the physiological and anatomical factors that contribute to the generation of biomedical
signals/images. The second module deals with data acquisition of different types of biomedical signals/images
that are generated through various medical instruments and transducers. The third module deals with various
Biomedical devices including Bio MEMS and drug delivery systems. Finally, the fourth module will include

clinical relevance and patient’s safety.

3. Text Books:

T1: Cromwell, Biomedical Instrumentation and Measurements; PHI, New Delhi, 2nd Ed. 2015.

4, Reference Books:
R1: R. S. Khandpur, Handbook of biomedical instrumentation, Tata McGraw-Hill.

R2: C. Raja Rao & S. K Guha, Principles of Medical electronics and Biomedical Instrumentation,
University press.
R3: John G Webster, Medical Instrumentation: A pplication and Design, John Wiley & Sons.

1
Wa BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

5. Course Plan:

Introduction

Fundamentals of
Medical
Instruments

Data acquisition
of biomedical
signals/images

 

Lecture topics

Overview of the course, and its
potential applications.

Introduction to medical
instruments, its basic
components and their
classifications.

Anatomical and Physiological
mechanisms of the human body Biological neurons and different
biological systems: auditory,

visual, respiratory, nervous and
cardiovascular.

Challenges involved in
measuring a living system and
the role of engineers in
healthcare facilities.

Transducers and __ electrode
placement for recording the
biomedical signals/images.

Clinical laboratory instruments
for biomedical signals/images.

 

T1,R1 & R2

T1,R1& R3
T1, R1

Learning Outcome

Students will be able to
understand the significance of
medical Instrumentation

Understand the essential
components that are required in
medical instruments.

Understand the anatomy and
physiology of the human body,
that is required for determining
the source of the biomedical
signal.

Understand the role of engineers
in healthcare.

Understand the role of
transducers and electrode
placements for recording various
biomedical signals.

Understand the role of clinical
instruments and its setup for
recording biomedical signals.

 

 
ABIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

1D biomedical signals:

Electrocardiogram (ECG),

Electroencephalogram (EEG),

Electroneurogram (ENG), Understand how various
Electromyogram (EMG), biomedical signals are recorded
Electroretinography (ERG), and collected using various
Electrooculography (EOG), medical instruments and
Event-related Potentials (ERPs), transducers.

Action potential,

Electrogastrogram (EGG),

Phonocardiogram (PCG),

Speech production and

recognition, sensory and Otoacoustic emission signals

Understand how various types of
biomedical images are recorded
and collected using various
medical instruments and
transducers.

2D biomedical signals (or
images): X-Ray, Magnetic
resonance imaging (FMRI),
Ultrasonic images, CT scans,
and PET.

Bio medical All types of medical devices R3 Understand about various types of

devices including Bio-MEMS, micro biomedical devices and their roles
drug delivery, micro pumps, in real world applications of
micro mixers etc. biomedical fields.

Understand the challenges faced
in clinics for using prosthetic
devices and on patient’s safety.

Clinical Therapeutic and prosthetic
Relevance devices, rehabilitation, Patient

monitoring systems and
Electrical safety

 
ABIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

6. Evaluation Scheme:

Component Duration | Weightage Date & Time Nature of component
(% ) (Close Book/ O pen Book)

Mid-Semester Test 25% Closed Book

Comprehensive 2h 40% 7th May FN Closed Book
Examination

Closed Book

Po

 

7. Chamber Consultation Hour: To be announced in the class.

8. Notices: All notices related to the course will be placed on Nalanda.

9, Make-up Policy:

Prior permission of the Instructor-in-Charge is usually required to take a make-up for a test.

In case of an unanticipated illness preventing a student from appearing for a test, the student must present a
Medical Certificate.

10. Note (if any):

Instructor-in-charge
Course No. EEE/INSTR F432
