BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

SECOND SEMESTER 2020-21
COURSE HANDOUT

 

Date: 31.12.2020

In addition to part I (General Handout for all courses appended to the Time table) this portion gives further
specific details regarding the course.

Course No : EEE F436

Course Title : Electromagnetic C ompatibility
Instructor-in-C harge : Dr. Praveen Kumar A.V.
Instructor(s) : None

Tutorial/Practical Instructors: None

1. Course Description: Basic concepts of EMI/EMC — sources, units, coupling, issues and regulation,
Electrical signals and spectral properties, Time and frequency relations, Measurement, Behavior of electrical
circuits, Self and mutual impedances, Transmission lines and signal integrity, Non-ideal behavior of wires and
lumped components, Emission and Susceptibility -conducted and radiated, Emission models — common mode
and differential, Measurement of emissions, System design for EMI, High speed circuit boards, Electrostatic
discharge, Cross-talk, Three conductor transmission lines, Grounding, Shielding, Cabling, Filtering,
Decoupling, Other EMI related issues.

2. Scope and Objective of the Course: Electromagnetic compatibility (EMC) is the engineering of electrical
systems to ensure the overall functioning in a complex electromagnetic environment. With the advancements in high
speed communication, switching techniques, and integrated circuit technologies, devices affect one another through the
phenomenon called the electromagnetic interference (EMI). A system that 1s designed for EMC doesn’t interfere with
the operation of other systems, is immune from the emissions of other systems and doesn’t interfere with its own
operation. An electronic product that is not compliant with the respective EMC standards doesn’t qualify to be marketed.
It is recommended to take the EMC into account starting from the design stage of a system, as discovering it at a later
stage, especially during the products’ compliance testing will cost both time and money. The course which is industry
relevant, addresses the issues, reasons, regulatory obligations, and solutions to EMC issues faced by electrical systems.
A good knowledge of undergraduate level electromagnetic theory and circuit analysis are required to fully appreciate
the course.

3. Text Books: Paul, C.R., “Introduction to Electromagnetic Compatibility”, 2" ed., Wiley (2010)
4, Reference Books:

R1. David K. Cheng, “Field and Wave Electromagnetics”, 2" ed. Pearson Education, 2009

R2. Course notes on Electromagnetic compatibility, Michigan State University. Available online at:
https://www.egr.msu.edu/emrg/electromagnetic-compatibility-emc-course-notes

5. Course Plan:

Module No. Lecture Session Reference Learning outcomes
(Topics)

EMI sources — external/
1-4: Introduction to EMI/EMC Ch.1-2 (TB), internal, unintentional /

and its components Supplementary | intentional, EMC, Aspects,
material decomposition of EMC

problem, History, Typical

scenarios, Regulations

(brief), EMC in product

 
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

| design — compliance vs
pre-compliance testing

 

 

3-9: Theoretical foundation Electrical dimensions,
EMI/EMC Ch.2, Ch.3 Units of EMC, Review of
Ch.4(TB), R2 | Maxwell’s equations, TEM

Appendix A-B, | mode, Transmission lines

(TB), R1 and signal _integrity

(concept), PCB lands and

microstrip line, Electrical

length and line delay,
Signals and _ spectral
content, Digital
waveforms,  Trapezoidal
signals — characteristics

 

10-14 : Non-ideal behavior of | Ch5(TB),R2 | Wires — resistance and

Components internal inductance,
External inductance and
Capacitance, Lumped
equivalent circuit of
parallel wires, PCB lands,
Effect of component leads,
Non-deal models _ of
Resistor, Capacitor and
Inductor, Use of R, C and
L in EMI reduction —
tradeoffs

 

15-22 : Emission and susceptibility Ch. 6 & 8, ch. 7 | Emissions / susceptibility (brief), R2 Conducted / radiated,
Simple emission models,
differential and common
mode currents,
Measurement of EMI

23-30: Coupling and cross-talk . 9- Near-field and far-field
coupling, Cross-talk —
Capacitive coupling,
Inductive coupling, LC
coupling, Common
impedance coupling,
Coupling to — shielded
cables, Electromagnetic
coupling
ABIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

31-40: Solutions to EMI/EMC problems | Ch.11 (TB), R2 | Grounding, Cable
shielding, Electromagnetic
Shielding, Filtering, Surge

protection, Decoupling,
Lightning protection,
Printed circuit boards —
design considerations,
EMC simulators

 

6. Evaluation Scheme:

Component Duration | Weightage Date & Time Nature of component
(% ) (Close Book/ O pen Book)

Open and /or Close book
Examination
Min. Surprise
10

7. Chamber Consultation Hour: TBA
8. Notices: Will be displayed only in Nalanda

9, Make-up Policy: Make-up will be allowed only in genuine cases, according to the latest institutional
policies.

10. Note (if any): TBA

Instructor-in-charge
Course No. EEE F436
