BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, PILANI
AUGSD
SECOND SEMESTER 2020-2021
Course Handout (Part ID)
Date :15/01/2021

In addition to part-I (General handout for all courses appended to the time table) this
portion gives further specific details regarding the course.

Course Number: GS F376

Course Title: Design Project

Instructor In-Charge: Prof. Devika

1. Scope and Objective of the Course: The course 1s specially designed to provide
an opportunity to the students for development of their academic skills and
logical thinking through open ended lab oriented design activities. As a part of
education, this project course follows a method of learning and therefore, the
student's actual day-to-day task involvement would constitute the central
thread of the learning process. The evaluation will recognize this aspect by
demanding day-to-day productivity and punctuality of the student.

2. Project (s) & Plan of Work:For the project title and details of plan of action,
please see the attached sheet, which will be given by the concerned instructor.

3. Evaluation Scheme:

Components Weightage (“o) Due Date
a) Project Title and Plan of Work 5 2nd Week
b) Viva I and II 10 4th Week
c)MidSem Seminar / Report 10+10 8th Week
d) Viva III and IV 10 12 Week
f) Final Report 25 16 Week
g) Weekly Interaction and Diary 10 16th Week
h) Seminar and Viva 20 16th Week

4. Mid-Semester Grading:
Mid-Semester grading will be done on the basis of evaluation components a), b), c), d) ,
and e) of the evaluation scheme.

5. Grading Procedure:

In addition to what is mentioned in Part I of handout, the grading will be done mainly on
the basis of the progress made towards attainment of the project objectives and will
recognize that each instructor has given specific task situation in which the student
participates in a cognitive manner.

Thus each instructor will recommend a grade for his student, for the consideration of the
Instructor-in-charge. In a specialized course of this nature the respective Instructor’s
assessment of the student vis-a-vis the objective of the project would be the central
criterion for arriving at final grade.
6. Notices: All notices pertaining to this course will be put up on the Humanities
&Social Sciences Department Notice Board.

7. General:

It is the student’s responsibility to ensure:

 

 

 

 

i. Continuous interaction with the Instructor. () Work to the satisfaction of the Instructor
ll. Adherence to plan of work.

¢ Evaluation(s) to be completed by the due date and evaluation marks are communicated
to the Instructor-in- charge by due date.

Instructor In-charge
GS F376
