BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

SECOND SEMESTER 2020-21
COURSE HANDOUT
Date: 18.01.2021

In addition to part I (General Handout for all courses appended to the Time table) this portion gives further
specific details regarding the course.

Course No : GS F223

Course Title : Introduction to Mass C ommunication
Instructor-in-C harge : SUSHILA SHEKHAWAT
Instructor(s) : None

Tutorial/Practical Instructors: None

1. Course Description: The course would introduce the students to the ever changing dynamics of Mass
Media with its evolutionary and operational details. The course would impart a broad knowledge of the
developments, operations, types and impact of mass media.

2. Scope and Objective of the C ourse:

e To lay a foundation for students and give them the basis of conceptual and practical skills in the
broad area of mass communication.

e To develop a range of skills that includes research, writing, editing and presentation for news and
strategic communication in print, audio and online.

e To develop an understanding about the working of Mass media at the macro and micro levels by
covering diverse range of Media such as Cinema, Social Media and Digital media.

3. Text Books: Kumar, J. Keval. Mass Communication in India. Fourth Edition. Mumbai: Jaico Publishing
House. (2010).
4, Reference Books:

1.Baran J, Stanley. Introduction to Mass Communication: Media Literacy and Culture. New Delhi: Tata
McGraw Hill Education Pvt Ltd.2010.

2.Bhattacharjee, Shymali. Media and Mass Communication: An Introduction. New Delhi: Kanishka
Publishers, Distributors. 2005.

3.Folkerts, Jean and Stephen Lacy. The Media in Y our Life: An introduction to Mass Communication.
Delhi: Pearson Education Pvt. Ltd. 2005.

4, V.S. Nirban and Sushila Rathore "Introduction to Content Design". EDD Notes for the course
BITS C394 Mass Media Content and Design. 2011.

5. Course Plan:

S.No Module Lecture session Reference Learning
outcomes
Pilani Campus

 

 

AUGS/ AGSR Division

1 Introduce the concept of Mass L(1-3)Mass T Section 1
Communication, Communication definition,
origin, various media,
importance, functions
2 Roles of Mass media in Indian L(4-6)Mass T Section
society and the world at large, the communication: Emerging 1,Section 4
effect on consumers through social trends and 5
and traditional media, mass
communication and culture
4 Definition, characteristics of mass L(7-8)Mass Media: T Section2
media, differences between mass __ Present issues and and 4
communication and mass media, _ challenges
mass audience, Types of mass
media, origin ,growth and
characteristics, Impact of mass
media though certain case studies.
5 Journalism: Background and issues, L(9-15)Roots of T Section2
History and development, Journalism,
Newspapers and Magazines. evaluations and history of
press, Types of Journalism
6 Writing for media: journalistic L(16-21)Reporting and _—‘T Section 2

process, components of news,
reporting skills, feature writing,
news analysis

i Cinema : history, origin and
development, documentary and
short film, cinema and
society, censorship and ethics

writing for media

L(22-26)Electronic media: T Section 2
Enigma of cinema

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani

 

Understanding the
concept of mass
communication ,its
evolution ,growth
and the present
scenario

Identifying the role
played by different
media agencies.
their impact on the
society and its
culture

Enabling the
students to
understand
different media
their functioning
and the concept of
mass audience

Acquainting them
with the concept of
journalism and its
operational
complexities in a
democratic country
and also a
comparison with
other countries

Developing an
aptitude for
interpreting the
news, editorials
features and also
enable them to
write

Making them aware
about the recent
trends as well as the
history of Indian
cinema with
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

specific reference
to all the major
developments

8 Radio :History, AIR, regional and L(27-28)RadioinIndia T Section2 (Familiarizing them
national services, broadcasting and with the radio as a
scripting form of mass

medium and its
significance even in

the present scenario
9 Television: origin and L(29-30) Expansion of T Section 2 (Helping them
development, impact of television, Television understand
satellite and cable TV, present Television and its
status functioning as an
indispensable
medium with

specific examples

10 Theatre: origin and its different L(31)Theatre Introduced T Section2 Making them
forms, relevance in the present familiar with the
context concept of theatre,

its forms, impact
and position in the

present context
11 Advertising: origin and L(32-33)A dvertising T Section 2 Introducing them to
development, advertising agencies, this important and
creativity in advertising, types, attractive field of
importance Advertising and its
changing
parameters
12 Audience and media. relation L(34-36)A udience and T Section3 | Making them
between media and society, media understand the
audience as market, audience relationship
Surveys, media literacy between media and

audience and also
the significance of
audience and their
influence on
media’s working

13 Public Relations: evolution, L(37-38)Public Relations T Section 2 Familiarizing them
growth, news conferences, scope, with the concept of
corporate communication, PR Public relations and
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

professionals as media trainers, its significance in

codes and ethics the present scenario
14 Corporate Communication: L(39-40)Corporate T Section Making them

Strategic P.R. / CC and communication 6,Reference understand

management ; defining strategy and book corporate

its relevance in public relations and communication

corporate communication, ,emerging trends in

campaign planning, management the present

and execution. corporate world and

policy making

6. Evaluation Scheme:

Weightage Nature of component
Component Duration Date & Time
200 (Close Book/ Open Book)

Mid-Semester Test 90 Min. | 30% To be
announced later

Comprehensive Examination 01/05/2021(FN) | Open book

Chamber C onsultation Hour: To be announced in the class.

Open book

Notices: All the information will be provided in the classes and in the google classroom.
Make-up Policy: Make Up- subject to prior permission.
10. Note (if any): The learning happens if you are present in the class.

Instructor-in-charge
Course No.: GS F223
