BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHONOLOGY AND SCIENCE, PILANI
Pilani Campus

 

INSTRUCTION DIVISION
FIRST SEMESTER 2020-21
Course Handout
Date: 18.01.2021
Course No. : BITS C484/GSF311
Course Title : Introduction to C onflict Management

Instructor-in-charge : MADHURIMA DAS

1. Scope and Objective of the C ourse:

To develop the knowledge and professional skills necessary to facilitate resolution of conflicts.
Emphasis would be laid on skills and specific techniques to resolve inter-personal, organizational
and community based conflicts. At the conclusion of the course, the student will understand the
basic dynamics of conflict, most significant interventions used to manage conflict, benefits and
costs of conflict, recognize his or her preferred style of conflict management and develop an
understanding and appreciation of the conflict management styles of others.

Text Book:

Mayer Bernard (2000). The Dynamics of Conflict Resolution, San Francisco: Wiley Company.

Reference Book:

(a) Deutsch, M., & Coleman, P.T. (2000). The Handbook of Conflict Resolution: Theory & Practice.
Jossey Bass: Wiley.

Course Plan:

Lecture.| Learning Objectives Topics to be covered Ref. to
No. Text Book
Chapters

1-9 To examine the | Introduction to Conflict Management: An Ch.1-4
relationship between | Overview and Class
gender, culture and | The nature of conflict Notes
conflict and to address the | Special focus on theories of Karl Marx and Max
role of value system | Weber
leading to social change. | Characteristics and dynamics of conflict

Reasons for conflict

The value of conflict in social change

The different approaches to addressing and

managing conflict.

10-15 To analyze conflicts from | Conflict Analysis Ch.2,3,
different perspective and | Examining the history and impacts of a conflict | and Class
try to identify the causes | Identifying the causes of conflict Notes
of differences. Identifying who the stakeholders are and their

interests,

Exploring stakeholder power and relationships

16-29 To introduce the vwle of | The Resolution :C ommunication, Mediation Ch.6, 9
communication, and Facilitation and Class

mediation and facilitation | The nature of Resolution Notes
in managing conflicts Communication

Save Paper.
mee) Save Trees.
m— g@ me g >= Save the World.

Please C onsider Y our Environmental Responsibilities
Do Not Print Unless Necessary

 

 
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHONOLOGY AND SCIENCE, PILANI
Pilani Campus

Skills in mediation and facilitation

Roles of mediator and facilitator in conflict

management

Dealing with emotions and difficult situations
To leam the skills of | Negotiating Agreements
negotiation and arrive at | Planning and preparing for negotiations
win-win situation. Improving negotiation skills to enhance the

negotiated results

Joint problem solving approaches

Building agreements
Explanation about | C onflict Anticipation and Prevention Ch.11and
building conflict | Building conflict management mechanisms Class
management mechanism | Consensus- building strategies Notes
and to learn about various
consensus building
strategies for conflict
anticipation prevention

 

Evaluation Scheme:

No. Component
ee a |
Test

Report / Quiz 2 X15=30 Marks
(One Report and One
Quiz)

Comprehensive 3 Hours 40 Marks
Examination

 

Reading Assignment: Students will come prepared to the class after reading the topic on which
lecture will be delivered in the class.

Chamber Consultation Hour: To be announced in class.

Course Notices: Notices, if any, concerning the course will be posted on Nalanda.

Make-up: Make-up's are not given as a routine. It is solely dependent upon the GENEUINENESS
of the circumstances under which a student fails to appear in a scheduled test.

Any other item: Students are strongly advised to attend the classes regularly and take the tests on the
scheduled dates.

Instructor-In-C harge
GS F311

Save Paper.
\. Save Trees.
fg ~ \Save the World.

Please C onsider Y our Environmental Res ee
Do Not Print Unless Necessary

 

 
