 

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/AGSR Division

 

 

 

SECOND SEMESTER 2020-21
COURSE HANDOUT
Date: 15.01.2021

In addition to part I (General Handout for all courses appended to the Time table) this portion gives
further specific details regarding the course.

Course No : GS F 334

Course Title : GLOBAL BUSINESS TECHNOLOGY AND KNOWLEDGE SHARING
Instructor-in-C harge : PRAVEEN GOYAL

Instructor(s) : PRAVEEN GOYAL

T utorial/Practical Instructors: NA
1. Course Description:

The course would cover the following areas: Global business environment, technology and economic
development, FDI, Liberalization and FDI trends in India, Technology imports, liberalization and in-house R
& D, Technology acquisition and growth of firms, Technology and exports, Technology intermediation.

2. Scope and Objective of the C ourse:

The purpose of this course is to provide an understanding of how different variables like changing corporate
landscape, new knowledge industries, and trends like networking and interdependence impact global
business relations and operations via ever changing technology acting as a fundamental driver. Course will
also aim at exploring how technology import and export happen, how technology is transferred and adapted
to new conditions. Further, it will also focus on the impact of technology on environment and society.
Additionally, it will deal with the managerial, strategic and technological, operational and tactical dimensions
of knowledge sharing via such technology movements. Students will also be introduced to the role of small
and medium enterprises and the changing roles of enterprises, leadership for the inter-networked business,
employment and jobs, access and equity, quality of life, global knowledge innovation infrastructure.

3. Text Books: T1. Siddharthan, N.S. and Rajan, Y. S., Global Business Technology and Knowledge
Sharing

4, Reference Books: R1. Drucker, Peter F, Managing in the next Society, Bulterworth-Heineman — 2002
R2. Drucker, Peter F, Drucker Lectures; Essential lessons on Management Society & Economy, TMH —
2010

R3 Drucker, Peter F, managing in Turbulent Times, Allied Publishers, 1980

5. Course Plan:

 

Save Paper.
ae) Save Trees.
£ > Save the World.

innovate

Please Do Not Print Unless Necessary
 

  
    

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/AGSR Division

Learning outcomes
T1

To understand the meaning of innovation and Indian experience of
innovation,

   

To have comparative understanding of technology development in India
and China strategies

To understand the role of WTO

To understand the trend of FDI inflow

To understand the process of mergers and acquisitions
To understand the importance of FDI in R&D

To understand the process of liberalization in India,

To learn the comparative analysis of FDI with rest of the world

To understand the growth of domestic industries

To understand the importance of In-House R&D and technology imports
To understand the process of technology transfer

To understand the meaning of Schumpeterian paradigm

To learn the technology growth in Indian firms

To understand the process of technology acquisition and exports,

To understand the role of IT and globalization of SMEs

4 26-30 Class Notes | To understand the role of technology in society
To understand the relationship of technology and sustainability
31-34 To understand the process of technology forecasting

35-40 T9 To understand the changing role of enterprises,

 

 
 

To understand the role of SME, role of state, and Science,

 

A Save Paper. gi

‘= Save Trees.
~ “$$ave the World. innovate Elon ews)

Please Do Not Print Unless Necessary

g

 
 

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/AGSR Division

Pf To understand the Technology and Innovation policy

NOTE: Supplementary notes, case studies, news articles would be provided and included in syllabus as
required.

 

 

 

6. Evaluation Scheme:

Weightage (% ) Date & Time Nature of Component

<TEST_1>_| Wille informed later

Exam

Case/A ssignment / «| OpenBook) =—_ (<sesid

Presentation

 

7. Chamber C onsultation Hour: To be announced in the class.
8. Notices: All notices of this course will be displayed on the Department of Management Notice Board.
9, Make-up Policy: Make-up may be allowed only in genuine cases.

Instructor-in-C harge
GS F 334

 

Save Paper.
\ Save Trees.
£ BE Asave the World. innovate

Please Do Not Print Unless Necessary
