BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

 

 

SECOND SEMESTER 2020-21
COURSE HANDOUT
Date: 18.01.2021

In addition to part I (General Handout for all courses appended to the Time table) this portion
gives further specific details regarding the course.

Course No : GS F332

Course Title : Contemporary India

Class hours : MWF 12-12:50 hrs via Google Classroom and Google Meet
Instructor-in-Charge =: Hari Nair

Instructor(s) : Hari Nair

Tutorial/Practical Instructors: None

1. Course Description: Elementary forays into Indian geography, economy, foreign/security
policy, polity and society. Distinguishing Modern and Contemporary: Modern India is
generally understood to be the period since the beginning of the establishment of British rule in
India, late 18th century onward (I. Bannerjee-Dube, A hzstory of Modern India, Delhi: Cambridge
2015). There are, of course, disagreements though. Certain other historians mark the beginning
of Modern India with the arrival of Vasco da Gama (C Markovits e¢ al, A history of Modern India
1480-1950, London: Anthem, 2004) and for these scholars the Modern period would be since
the late 15th/early 16th century. ‘Contemporary’ would vary according to the
questions/disciplines: For the polity, the timeline may begin with Indian independence in 1947
and the emergence of a republican nation-state with citizenship rights. Here, ‘contemporary’
coincides with the post-colonial. However, since 1991, the Indian economy has transitioned
sionificantly. So from an economic perspective, the timeline of Contemporary India would be
since ca. 1991.

2. Scope and Objective of the Course: This course aims to assist students in understanding
select processes of long duration that created/shaped Contemporary India with the purpose of
aiding their analysis of recent events/changes/issues/problems/challenges. Oscar Wilde is
reputed to have remarked that “education is an admirable thing, but it is well to remember from
time to time that nothing that is worth knowing can be taught.” Can India be taught? Studying a
vast, diverse, complex and complicated country such as contemporary India is challenging. If
studying is challenging, teaching about India is more so. The most effective approach for studying
India - and especially in a course such as this with multi-disciplinary modules - is the critical
inquiry approach. The class sessions would be based less on lectures, while relying more on
inquiry worksheets with the instructor facilitating learning rather than teaching. Students are
expected resolve questions/problems in class as often as possible by accessing the internet;
through discussion with peers and the instructor; as well as by referring to material
(print/video/audio) located outside the class room.

1
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

 

 

3. Text Books: Rothermund, Dietmar, Contemporary India: Pohtical Economic and Social developments
since 1947, Delhi-Chennai: Pearson, 2013.

4. Reference (s):

Digital South Asia Library retrieved from http://dsal.uchicago.edu/ on 05 January 2018.

Basu, Kaushik and Annemarie Maertens, The new concise Oxford companion to Economics in India, New
Delhi: Oxford University Press, 2012.

Chandoke, Neera and Praveen Priyadarshi, eds., Contemporary India: Economy, Society, Politics, New
Delhi: Pearson Education, 2009.

Fell McDermot, Rachel, Leonard A. Gordon, Ainslie T. Embree, Frances W. Pritchett and
Dennis Dalton, eds., Sources of Indian traditions: Modern India, Pakistan, and Bangladesh, Delhi:
Penguin, 2014.

Gopal Jayal, Neerja and Pratap Bhanu Mehta, eds., The Oxford Companion to Politics in India, Delhi:
Oxford University Press, 2011.

Metcalfe, Thomas and Barbara Metcalfe, A concise history of Modern India, 2°" edition, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2006.

Mohan, Rakesh, ed., India transformed: 25 years of economuc reforms, New Delhi: Penguin Viking, 2017.
Pant, Harsh, Indian Foreign Policy: An overview, Manchester: Manchester University Press, 2016.

Roy, Tirthankar, Te Economic Hostory of India 1857-2010, Delhi: Oxford University Press, 2020.
Vanaik, Achin and Rajeev Bhargava, eds., Understanding contemporary India: Critical perspectives,
Hyderabad: Orient Blackswan, 2010.

Additional sources and readings may be suggested during class sessions.

5. Course Plan:

Module and Lecture session contents Reference | Learning outcomes
no. of class
sessions

Geographical Nomenclature of India: TB map on p. | Gain an acquaintance
134 and those | the geography of the
between pp. | Indian republic and its
144-5. historical precedents

and historical
preface to

Geographical preface to
contemporary India through map
contemporary work; linguistic identities; data as a

India public good

7 sessions Retrieved
from
http://dsal.u
chicago.edu/t
eference/sch
wartzberg/pa
ger.htmlPobje

 
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

ct=187 O5
Jan 18
Economy — 7 Road to economic reform of 1991 | IB, chapter Identity the key

sessions (and beyond) yo, Funds Indlinn economy since

1947

 

Planning and the License Raj
regime 1950-64

Agriculture: Drought, poverty and
the poverty line; Green
Revolution; farmer suicides

Industrial stagnation and ‘SelfReliance’: 1967-90

Foreign policy | Non-alignment TB chapter Gain an overview of
(external) — 7 11 India’s foreign
sessions Disputes with Pakistan and China security policy

New orientations at the end of the

Cold War

Polity — 7

sessions

TB, chapters | Explore the structure

Issues concerning citizenship, 43 © the Indi i
- of the Indian polity

religion and secularism
Local government

RTI

Society — 7 TB chapters | Explore select aspects

Issues involving Gender, Caste, 6.10 and 11
Women

sessions of Indian society

 
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

 

 

6. Evaluation Scheme:

Component Duration | Weightage Date & Time Nature of
(") component
(Close Book/ Open
Book)
Mid-Semester Test | 90 mins To be confirmed by Closed Book
as per AUGSD On Google
AUGSD Classroom
hand out
template
Comprehensive 3 hrs as 10 May 2021 FN Closed Book
Examination per On Google
AUGSD Classroom
hand out
template
Self Study Due Fri 05 Feb 2021;
Assignment Prelim to be uploaded on
draft Google Classroom.!
Self Study Due Fri 02 Apr 2021
Assignment Final to be uploaded on
draft Google Classroom.’
Oral presentation On Google Meet;
of the Self Study discussion schedule to be
Assignment after class announced in class or
via E-mail after
receiving the final draft
submission

 

Evaluation Scheme®

Evaluation components and its nature: There would be three evaluation components. ‘These
are the Mid-Semester (written, closed book, 90 mins) and Comprehensive Exams (written, closed
book, 180 mins) and a Self-Study Assignment. However, the Self-Study Assignment is divided
into three parts, which is continuous and cumulative, and has to be performed all through the
semester. The details of the exams would be as per the schedule of the Instruction Division.

' The deadline must be adhered to. Any extension will be deemed equivalent to rules governing make-up in accordance with Academic
Regulations 4.07.

* The deadline must be adhered to. Any extension will be deemed equivalent to rules governing make-up in accordance with Academic
Regulations 4.07.

> Please see the Bloom’s taxonomy corresponding to the cognitive domain for learning outcomes and how these match with the

evaluation components at the end of this course hand out.
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

Self-study Assignment (SSA): The Self Study Assignment is broken down into three parts: one,
a prelim written draft; two, a final written draft; and three, an oral presentation based on the final
written draft of the self-study assignment. This evaluation component is in accordance with
Academic Regulations 4.01 & 4.05 (Open Book). The prelim draft is a plan document, and hence,
synoptic. The final written draft of the SSA will be based on your cumulative work through the
semester. It will be followed by a brief oral presentation usually in the form of a panel discussion
and often these group discussions tend to last between 60-90 mins.

SSA prelim draft details concerning submission: Length - 1-2 pages max; please number the
pages on the top right corner; your name, ID no. and word count on the top right of the page.
Expected contents and break-up of marks upon 10/20: Problematic - Aims and hypotheses
of your assignment (2/4); detailed thematic index (2/4); method of study (1/2); list of sources &
studies (3/6) with a timeline of tasks factoring in sources/studies and themes (2/4). You might
have to run through originality check/anti-plagiarism software TURNITIN (or URKUND in its
absence), if necessary. In that case, please attach a print copy of the software report along with
your assisnment. The evaluated SSA prelim draft with the instructor’s comments must be
attached when you make the final draft submission of the SSA.

SSA final draft details concerning submission: 2500 words max; include word count at the
end of your draft; please number the pages on the top right corner with your name, ID number
and word count. Break-up of marks 15/30: Problematic and use of sources (5/10); Structure
(5/10); Critical assessment (5/10).

Synoptic style sheet (generic guidelines): Garamond 16 for text, 14 for citations in the body of
the text; 12 for footnotes; spacing 1.5; name and roll number on the top right margin with date of
submission. You might have to run by originality check/anti-plagiarism software TURNITIN (or
URKUND in its absence) as may be required. In such cases, please attach a print copy of the
software report along with your assignment.

Oral presentation (5/10 marks): You ate expected to make an oral presentation in the form
of a panel discussion based on your final draft submission and respond to queries. The
schedule would be mailed to you after the submission of the final draft. The panel discussions
are usually scheduled after Institute hours and tend to last from 60-90 mins.

You are expected to answer the following questions during the oral presentation:
Why did you choose the topic that you did? What is the question/problematic that you were
trying to resolve through the SSA? Respond to this particular question in as much detail as
required. This forms the core of your presentation. How did you attempt the resolution of
the problematic? Did you know anything about the theme earlier? How did the SSA help you?
What are the weaknesses of your SSA? Did you require the assistance of the instructor for your
SSA? Did his inputs aid you in anyway? If not, what should he have done? How did your
assignment evolve over the duration of the semester? Power point presentations are especially
useful if you have images, maps, graphs and the like. Talking to the audience rather than reading
from a text is preferred for an oral presentation as the former demonstrates clarity of thought of
the speaker and because it may also encourage a discussion amongst the listeners.

a
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

7. Chamber Consultation Hour: Wed 18-19 hrs in 6168-U;
otherwise by prior appointment via E-mail harinair@pilani.bits-pilani.ac.in

8. Notices: Notices concerning the course will be announced in class and/or shared via Google
drive/ e-mailed. Please be alert to the possibility of change of dates according to the
academic calendar. Therefore, confront and verify the dates of the evaluation components
with the Instructor/Time-table provided by ID.

9. Make-up Policy: If you are unable to present an evaluation component for reasons other
than a medical condition and you desire to make-up, please inform the I-C in person with a
written application, at least a week in advance of the date on which the component is scheduled,
wherein the reasons for your absence/inability is appropriately presented; for absence due to illhealth, please provide documentary support from the BITS medical centre if you are requesting
a make-up. For make-up, please refer to Academic regulations 4.07.

10. Note (if any):
General guidelines for your self-study assignment

Choose a specific topic from the themes contained in the Course Handout I. You could choose
any topic/theme that interests you, including one about which you know very little or nothing at
all. Your written assignment could take the form of a reading report; a book-review, or a
revision of select scholarly literature, or a term paper. Your self-study assignment could also
take the form of a report (written or compose a short video). However, it should contain
more than a metre narrative. It should respond to a question or problem that you are trying to
resolve. If it is a video, the script and detailed screenplay would be evaluated as your prelim
draft.

Whatever form it takes, make sure that you do not include any phrase or sentence,
paraphrased or verbatim, text or image, intentionally or otherwise, without due
acknowledgment of the sources. To do so would amount to plagiarism and it is an extremely
serious ethical and legal offence. You are also cautioned against submitting a work written by
someone else, or by you but for a different purpose, or for another course, previously or
simultaneously. The discovery of any violation of these guidelines might result in your score
being nullified for the corresponding as well as related evaluation component(s). This offence
may be reported to the Department of Humanities & Social Sciences.

For understanding what amounts to plagiarism, please refer to www.plagiarism.ore or similar
websites. If the student still has persisting doubts about what may or may not amount to
plagiarism, it is her/his duty to assuage the doubts with the instructor well ahead of
deadlines. Ignorance of the norms/rules is not a sufficient cause for justifying
plagiarism. You might have to run your assignment on the originality check/anti
6
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

 

 

plagiarism software (preferably TURNITIN and its in absence URKUND). In such
cases, please do so sufficiently ahead of the due date of submission. As the deadlines
approach, the traffic on the server might turn heavy.

For information on documentation, you are encouraged to follow the guidelines contained in
The Chicago Manual of Style bttps://www.chicagomanualofstyle.org/home.html. In the 16"
edition, please see especially chapters 14 & 15. A copy of the same is available in the BITS Pilani
Library with classification 655.25 C533 2010.

A book-review ought to contain a summary of the book, an outline of its structure, an
explanation of how this book is different from others of its ilk, information regarding the
author(s), and a constructive critique of the thesis/argument of the book. The purpose of a
book-review is to inform and invite readers to engage with the book. You could consider other
reviews of the book that you are reviewing, in case these are available. This would prevent your
review from being repetitive. If this is too demanding, you could prepare a report based on your
reading of the book(s) or parts thereof.

A revision of scholarly literature (or literature review) is a more complex assignment than a
book review because you are evidently dealing with more than one study. Its purpose is to
highlight the nature of existing knowledge in the corresponding field/subject. A literature review
is a preliminary but necessary step towards conducting research (understood here as a serious
inquiry) in a chosen field/subject of intense study.

A term paper is an academic assignment that normally contains a problematic: a question,
one or more hypotheses, an explicit statement of method for the resolution of the question, a
study of sources, and a revision of existing scholarly literature. It should contain a thematic
index that outlines the structure of your paper.

You ate expected to make an oral presentation in the form of a panel discussion of your
self-study assignment in class. The schedule will be mailed to you after the submission of the
final draft of your assignment. The purpose of the oral presentation is to develop your oral
skills; share the outcome of your self-study assignment with your classmates, who may not have
read your assignment; and generate a discussion. You are encouraged to use images, if required.

All your assignments should be uploaded on Google Classroom. Please do not slip your
assignment under the door of the instructor’s chamber. As a precautionary measure
against loss of your written assignment by you or the instructor, it is the responsibility of
the student to have a back-up copy of the same at least until the final evaluation of the
course is completed. To avoid losing your e-copy stored in a computer, please ensure
that you progressively save your draft written work on google drive/e-mail/dropbox as
well.

Reading, studying, thinking, as well as composing a video and redacting a text are laborious
tasks, which improve with methodical practice. For thinking through a subject, for organizing
one’s thoughts, and for writing in a structured manner require the fullness of time. Rushed
writing under the pressure of deadlines does not often fulfill the aforesaid aims. One could
consider this assignment as an exercise in mastering the craft of academic writing in the
Humanities and Social Sciences, but above all, for clarifying your thinking process, sharpening
yout critical skills, and articulating your views persuasively.

7
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

appraise
argue assess attach
Evaluation choose compare conclude
contrast defend describe discriminate
Make and defend judgments based on internal estimate evaluate explain judge justify interpret
evidence or external criteria. relate predict rate select summarize support value

 

 

S nthesis arrange assemble categorize collect combine comply
y compose construct create design develop devise explair
Compile component ideas into a new whole or formulate generate plan prepare rearrange reconstruct relate
propose alternative solutions. reorganize revise rewrite setup summarize synthesize tell write

. analyze appraise Dbreakaow! siculate categorize compare
Analysis ontrast criticize diagram a fferentiate discriminate aistinguis
Break down objects or ideas into simpler parts Pe Mo eel me le Mmecaees CMT ets Mrel ial tat:

 

and find evidence to support generalizations. point out question relate select separate subdivide test

apply change choose compute demonstrate discover
. . dramatize employ illustrate interpret manipulate
Application ieee Ware
modify operate practice predict prepare produce
Apply knowledge to actual situations. relate schedule show sketch solve use write

 

classify convert defend describe discuss
distinguish estimate explain express
extend generalized give example(s)

 

Comprehension identify indicate infer locate paraphrase
predict recognize rewrite review select
Demonstrate an understanding of the facts. summarize translate

arrange define describe duplicate
identify label list match memorize

name order outline recognize
Knowledge relate recall repeat reproduce
Remember previously learned information. select state

 

Instructor-in-charge
