BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

 

 

COURSE HANDOUT (PART- ID)
Date: 13 January 2021

In addition to part I (General Handout for all courses appended to the Time table) this portion gives further
specific details regarding the course.

Course No : HSS F224
Course Title : English Skills for Academics
Instructor-in-C harge : Chintalapalli Vijayakumar

1. Course Description:

Nature and scope of English for specific academic purposes; common core academic genres: description,
narration, cause-effect, problem solution, and argumentative; writing for specific purposes: paragraphs,
essays, Critiques, summaries and research writing; academic lexis: AWL, AFL and AVL; lexical cohesion:
adverbials, collocations; publication of word lists for English for Specific Purposes (ESP): corpus-based
study (through corpus analysis tools); discourse patterns: argument & counter argument, self-referencing,
adverbials; language use: word, phrase, clause and text level aspects of discipline specific texts

2. Scope and Objective:

This course will enable you to process and produce texts in English in a manner appropriate to the higher
educational academic contexts. In this course, we will analyze key academic genres (description,
argumentation, problem-solution) to understand the macro and micro aspects of language use. In addition,
we will also be producing texts that confirm to the conventions of academic language use. Initially, our
focus will be on university registers from social sciences and humanities and comparable non-academic
registers, especially from newspapers and magazines, and their typical lexico-grammatical features.
Subsequently, we will explore discipline-specific texts of your choice and produce word lists. Although
spoken academic genres (academic lectures) are equally important in academic contexts, this course will
focus intensively on the written language in use for reading and writing purposes.

correct and improve their writing independently;

create discipline specific word lists for academic purposes;

use language corpora in their academic writing;

analyze different academic genres;

discover language use patterns of vocabulary and grammar in texts;
offer constructive feedback to peers (peer-feedback)

Classroom methodology:

Y ou will be participating in hands-on Data Driven Learing (DDL) sessions producing specific-purpose
word lists and studying typical language patterns. To achieve the objectives, we will work together on
some freely available technology tools as well
 

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

3. Text Book:

Liss, R., & Davis, J. (2014). Effective Academic Writing Second Edition: 3. Oxford: Oxford University

Press.

4, Reference Books:

1.

Biber, D., Conrad, S., & Leech, G. (2010). Longman Student Grammar of Spoken and Written
English. New Delhi: Pearson Education Limited.

Charles, M., & Pecorari, D. (2016). Introducing English for Academic Purposes. New Y ork:
Routledge.

Chazal, E. d., & Moore, J. (2013). Oxford EAP: A Course in English for Academic Purposes/
Advanced C1. Oxford: OUP.

McCormack, J., & Slaght, J. (2009). English for Academic Study: Extended Writing & Research
Skills (American Edition). Reading, UK: Garnet Education.

. Oxford University Press. (2014). Oxford Learner's Dictionary of Academic English. Oxford: Oxford

University Press.

. Sowton, C. (2016). Contemporary Academic Writing: A Comprehesnive Course for Students in

Higher Education. Reading: Garnet Education.

. Swales, J.M., & Feak, C. B. (2012). Academic Writing for Graduate Students. Michigan ELT:

Michigan University.

5. Course Plan

 

Class notes
Handout & English for | of EAP in higher education; RB2—CH 7
Academic Purposes RB3- U1

Introduction to Compare and Contrast & Cause-and-Effect; | TB —U 2,3
Academic Genres (non-academic & academic genres)
Analyze and produce simple, complex,
compound sentences
General to Specific; Definitions: Common ways to define in
Specific to General academic writing; extended definitions
Texts
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

Theme — Rheme; Paragraph: Understanding a paragraph TB-U1
Paragraph Writing (thesis statement & supporting details; Class notes
Theme & Rheme)

—
I
CO

co)

-10 | Analyzing academic Problem-solution and argumentative genres | TB—U 4
genres (academic genres in use) Class notes;
RB 6-—U7
RB 7-U3

a five paragraph essay Class notes
15-16 Stating Opinions and Book reviews = : :

18-19 | Academic vocabulary | Understand language use across academic Class notes
and Word lists disciplines : University registers Academic | RB2-Ch.8
(introduction) Vocabulary (AWL, AVL) RB 6— U7

 

 

i)
cn)

Practice Test: On Use academic lexis
Academic Vocabulary | Understand the nature and use of
in Use collocations

21-22

Academic Vocabulary | Understand form, meaning and use relations | Class notes
Use Dictionaries for language learning TB —U3
(academic reading and writing RB 2-—Ch. 8
RB 5

23-24 | Introduction to Apply Lexical Analysis Software Class notes
AntC onc

25-26 | Publication of a Apply Lexical Analysis software AntC onc tools
wordlist (student task) (software)

27-28 | Discourse Study lexical bundles in academic texts Class notes
Conventions

29 -30

Non-academic vs Study non-academic and academic registers | Student compiled
‘cedemic reaisier Submision of Word List Tsk sei) comers
31-32 | Introduction to BAWE | Use online tools to study academic language | BAWE Corpus
33 Writing Task focus on coherence (register & genre) and Class notes
cohesion (lexical)
(Text analysis)
4

Problem-solving Notice the grammar and vocabulary patterns | Online corpus
Hands-on of English tools
Concordancing

 

3
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

   

ooo <=

examples

35-36 | Referring to literature | Investigate database in a manner similar to Class notes
expert’s referring to literature

37-38 | Making and Find the functions of linking adverbials in Class notes
countering arguments | specific registers/disciplines (argument
structures)

Making and Study frequency, range and dispersion Class notes

 
 

modifying claims,
Suggestions and
proposals

6. Evaluation Scheme:

Duration Weight Date & Time Remarks
(% )

Comprehensive 3 hrs. To be announced by | Open Book

Examination AUGSD

Midterm 90 min 20%
Examination
a

Close Book

Assignment 1 90 min 10%

Close Book

Assignment 2: Toward the end 30 % To be submitted Open Book / Take Home
Publication of an of the third towards the end of the | Three different
academic word quarter of the third quarter of the constituents each graded
list semester for 10 %

  

7. Chamber Consultation Hour: A ppointment can be sought by email:
c.vijayakumar@ pilani.bits-pilani.ac.in

 

8. Notices: All announcements will be made during the class hours. Email intimations may also be sent.

9, Make-up Policy: Make up- subject to prior permission from the IC. No make-ups are generally possible
for assignments.

10. Closed Book Test: No reference materials of any kind will be permitted inside the exam hall.

Open Book Exam: Use of any printed / written reference material (books and notebooks) and access to
online/ ad-hoc corpora will be permitted inside the examination hall. However, plagiarism checks will be
performed on the submitted content.

Instructor-in-charge
Course No. HSS F224
