BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE Pilani, Pilani Campus
INSTRUCTION DIVISION

Course Handout (Part II)
Date:

In addition to part-I (General handout for all courses appended to the time table) this portion
gives further specific details regarding the course.

Course Number: HSS F247

Course Title: Social Informatics
Level 2"¢ year onward
Credit 3

Lecture Hours 40
Instructor-in-Charge: Virendra Singh Nirban
Course Description

This course aims to explore the multidisciplinary dimensions of Information Technology as it
exists in complex social structures. Apart from functional and critical perspective of how
information technology influences society in numerous forms, the course also aims to explore
how society influences the innovation of information technology. The course delves into how
information has evolved into a commodity for commercial and economic purposes. The course
challenges students to think critically about technological change and acquire a more
sophisticated understanding of the political, economic, and social considerations that underlie
technological development.

1. Scope and Objective of the Course:
The successful completion of the course would enable the students to:

(i). Understand that the design, use, and application of information technology in a social
structure

(ii). Be able to analyze contemporary sociotechnical issues from multi-disciplinary
perspectives.

(iii). Be able to locate primary and secondary sources of information on social informatics
topics, summarize their content, critically engage with the arguments presented therein, and
use them as evidence to create their own arguments.

(iv). Describe a variety of social, political, and economic contexts that shape information and
communication technologies (ICTs) and their impact on society.

(v). Assimilate, Structure and A nalyse various type of information as valuable data for social,
political, and economic contexts
2. Text Book : Social Informatics: Past, Present and Future — Pnina Fichman and Howard
Rosenbaum, Cambridge Scholars Publishing

3. Course Plan

Lecture Tonics
No. P

FS pte to Social Informatics

Consent of the Networked
10-12 Critical Informatics

13-15 — [Infrastructure and Equitable Information Technology

16-18  [dentity and Community
19-22  |Hackers and Hacking
23-30 ‘|Ethics, Law, and Policy
34-37 [Privacy and Surveillance

38-40 [Artificial Intelligence

4, Evaluation Scheme

(9

 

Mid-Semester Examination 90 Minutes ae

 

9. Chamber Consultation Hours: Email appointment is mandatory.

Virendra Singh Nirban
Instructor In-charge
