 

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
Instruction Division

 

15.01.2021

In addition to Part | (General Handout for all courses appended to the time table) this portion further
gives specific details regarding the course.

Course No. >: ME F472
Course Title : Precision Engineering
Instructor-in-Charge : Tribeni Roy

1. Course Description:

Precision Engineering deals with accurate and precise measurements of manufactured products. The
present course covers various aspects of Precision Engineering such as concept of accuracy, accuracy of
numerical control systems, tolerances and fits, acceptance tests for machine tools, static stiffness and its
influence on machining accuracy, inaccuracies due to thermal effects, influence of forced vibrations on
accuracy, dimensional wear of cutting tools and its influences on accuracy, clamping and setting errors,
location principles and errors due to location, surface roughness and microfinishing processes,
dimensioning and dimensional chains, methods of improving accuracy and surface finish, thread and gear
measuring instruments, coordinate measuring machines, introduction to computer aided tolerancing.

2. Scope and Objective of the Course:
This course is designed to equip students with the fundamental theories in precision engineering. The
students will be introduced to various errors that affects precision in manufacturing.

3. Text Books:

i) R.L. Murty, “Precision Engineering in Manufacturing”, New Age International Publications, Delhi, 2010
(71).

li) R.K. Jain, “Engineering Metrology”, Khanna Publishers, Delhi, 2013 (72).

iii) Lecture Notes (73)

4. Reference books
i) V.C. Venkatesh and S. Izman, "Precision Engineering", Tata McGraw-Hill Publishers (R12)

 

A Save Paper.
ge. Save Trees.
£°* Save the World.

innovate

Please Do Not Print Unless Necessary
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
Instruction Division

 

machine tools and numerical
control systems

M1 (L8-9) Acceptance tests for | To learn about basic type of tests and
machine tools measuring instruments for testing machine
tools

etc.
(L21-25) Surface roughness and | To lern about basics of surface roughness of
.
dimensional chains
(L30-33) Methods for improving To learn methods for improving accuracies in

(L34-37) Measuring instruments To learn basics of thread and gear measuring
for various components instruments and coordinate measuring
M3 machines

6. Evaluation Scheme:
Duration | Weightage
Components . Date
(minutes) (%)
; Will be announced by
Mid-semester test 25
AUGSD-AGSRD

Assignments/Projects/Seminars/Quiz pf To be announced in the class

. ae Will be announced by
Comprehensive Examination. 120 CB/OB
AUGSD-AGSRD

A Save Paper.
gy) Save Trees.
£ P= &Save the World.

 

 

 

 

innovate achieve

Please Do Not Print Unless Necessary
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
Instruction Division

 

7. Chamber Consultation Hours:

To be announced in the first class.

8. Notices:
All notices related to this course will be put on the Nalanda/Google Classroom/email.

9. Make-up Policy:

Make-up will be granted ONLY in genuine cases with prior permission as per the institute rules.

Instructor- in-Charge
ME F472

 

 

Save Paper. > .
ge) Save Trees. |
ot ~" “Save the World. innovate achieve

Please Do Not Print Unless Necessary
