BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

SECOND SEMESTER 2020-2021
Course Handout (Part Il
16 Jan, 2021

In addition to part-| (General handout for all courses appended to the timetable) this portion gives further specific
details regarding the course:

Course Number : IS F462 
Course Title : Network Programming
Instructor In-Charge : HARI BABU K
Course Website : httos://canvas.instructure.com/courses/2518080

1. Scope and Objective of the Course
This course is intended for software engineers involved in developing, maintaining and supporting distributed and
network applications in the UNIX environment. The course teaches about system programming necessary for
server and client programming. It teaches programming aspects of low-level protocol TCP, UDP, raw sockets, data
link level access, multicast, broadcast etc. It covers the recent developments in web programming and web server
technologies. It will also teach about distributed programming aspects like RPC, and web services. Course structure
involves interesting assignments and labs to strengthen the concepts.

2. Text Book

T1. W. R. Stevens,UNIX Network Programming, Vol |, Networking APIs: Sockets and XTI, Pearson Education, 3rd
Edition.

T2. W.R.Stevens, UNIX Network Programming, Interprocess Communication, Vol Il Pearson Education, 2nd Edition.
3. Reference Books

R1. The Linux Programming Interface: Linux and UNIX System Programming Handbook by Michael Kerrisk, No
Starch Press © 2010

R2. W.R. Stevens, Advanced Programming in the UNIX Environment, Pearson Education, 2008.

4. Course Plan:
a. Modules
Learning Objectives
System To understand and practice I/O, process and signal
Programming management in Linux systems

To understand and practice Inter-process communication
(IPC) mechanisms

Client & Server To understand various I/O models and their applications.

Design To understand various client and server designs and their
performance.
To understand how to create a daemon.

 
  
  
 
  

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

  
 

Web Servers & To understand architectures of contemporary Web Servers and
Web Applications their scalability
To understand client-side scripting.

 
  
 
  

To understand web application frameworks on server-side

  

Socket To understand and practice Socket API for building TCP/UDP
Programming - based client-server.

TCP,UDP To understand API required to access DNS.

To understand the configuration level options available for Socket
API

To understand protocol design and implementation.

 
  
 

  

Socket To understand and practice the application of raw sockets
Programming and link level access API.
- Low level To understand how to do multicast and broadcast.

 
   
 
  

To understand Unix domain sockets

  
 

Distributed To understand the concept of distributed programming
Programming and how it is different from socket programming

To understand RPC, XML-RPC, JSON-RPC, SOAP
To understand how to create Web services

     
 

To understand data exchange formats such as XDR and
protocol buffers

Security To understand security issues in programming multi-user
UNIX server systems.

To understand security attacks in network-facing servers.

Lectures | Module Topic Reference
Unix History; Fundamental Concepts; System Programmin
Y pts; System Programming | 24. Chapter 1,2,3
Concepts;
2-4

Unix File |/O; Standard I/O Library; fcntl; ioctl; Unix R1: Chapter 4, 5, 6, 13,
Processes; Program Execution; Error Handling; Unix Signals 20, 24-26

R1: Chapter 43-49, 515-7 Unix IPC: Pipes, FIFOs, System V Message queues , System V 55
Semaphores, System V Shared Memory, Memory mapping;
T2: Chapter 3,4,6

IV Overview of Transport Layer Protocols: TCP, UDP; Client- T1: Chapter 2 + class
server architectures; notes

 
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

Sockets, Sockaddr structure; TCP and UDP Socket API; TCP T1 : Chapter 3-5,7, 8
client-server examples; UDP examples; Socket Options; R1: Chapter 59

Domain name conversion API; IPv6 differences; IPv4-IPv6ene a oo, T1: Chapter 11, 12, 22
compatibility; Adding reliability to UDP applications;

T1: Chapter 5

R1: Chapter 59
Non-Blocking 1/0; I/O multiplexing; Signal driven I/O; T1: Chapter 6, 14, 25 +
Asynchronous I/O (POSIX API); Client and server design with | class notes
select() call; shutdown(); Advanced I/O API; R1: Chapter 63

Unix domain sockets: Addressing, Socket pair, Descriptor T1: Chapter 15
passing , Credential passing;
Overview of Pthreads; Pthreads Synchronization;

Protocol Implementation Issues: encoding, framing;

Non-blocking |/O; Non-blocking connect; Client alternative T1: Chapter 16
designs; Performance analysis;

Preforking models; Prethreading models; Performance T1: Chapter 22, R1:
analysis; Case study: Apache; The C10K problem; Event- Chapter 60,61

driven architectures; Concurrency models for UDP servers; T1: Chapter 22

Web Servers: Case studies of Apache, Nginx Class notes
API: CGI, FastCGI, SAPI, ISAPI
Scalability with server scale-out

Broadcasting: concepts & implementation; T1 : Chapter 20,21
Multicasting: addresses; concepts, implementation;
Broadcasting & multicasting in IPv6;
Raw Sockets: Socket creation; input, output; ping: design & T1 : Chapter 28,29
implementation; trace route: design & implementation; UDP
asynchronous errors;

T2 : Chapter 16
Socket programming vs RPC; SUN RPC Class notes

Web services Class Notes

VII Security issues in programming: Buffer overflow attacks, R1: Chapter 38
Jailing

 

5. Evaluation Scheme:

Component Weightage Date, Time & Remarks

(%) Venue

 
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

Lab Exercises 10% Take Home
(Individual)

Assignments 30% Take Home
(Maximum of
two members

per group)

Comprehensive 2 Hours 35% <IEST C> Partly open
Examination

6. Notices:

 

 

All notices shall be displayed only on course webpage.

7. Malpractices:
While coding assignments/lab exercises you are not allowed to share source code but discussions are allowed with
others. Any copying detected among groups/individuals will be reported to appropriate authority.

8. Make-up Policy:
No makeup will be given for Labs and Assignment components. For tests, however, make-up will be granted
strictly on prior permission and on justifiable grounds only.

9. Chamber Consultation Hours:
Tue 4-5PM
Instructor-in-charge

IS F462
