BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

SECOND SEMESTER 2020-2021
Course Handout (Part-II)
Date: 10 March 2021
In addition to Part-I (General Handout for all Courses appended to the time table) this portion
gives further specific details regarding the Course.

Course No. : MATH F112

Course Title : MATHEMATICS-II

Instructor-in-charge 1: JITENDER KUMAR

Instructors : Amol Holkundkar, Ashish Tiwari, Balram Dubey, Bhupendra Kumar

Sharma, Devendra Kumar, Gaurav Dwivedi, Krishnendra Shekhawat,
Sangita Y adav, Sandipan Dutta, Santhosh Kumar Pamula, Sourav
Kumar Sasmal, Trilok Mathur.

1. Scope and Objective of the Course: The course is meant as an introduction to Linear
Algebra and Theory of Functions of Complex Variable and their applications.

2. Course Description: System of linear equations, Vector spaces, Basis and dimension of
vector spaces, Linear transformations, Range and kemel, Eigenvalues and eigenvectors.

Function of complex variables and their analyticity, Elementary functions, Integration,
Taylor and Laurent series expansions, Calculus of residues and its applications.

3. Text Books:

(i) Elementary Linear Algebra with Supplemental Applications by H. Anton and Chris
Rorres, 11" Edition, 2014, John Wiley & Sons.

(ii) Complex Variables and Applications by R.V. Churchill and J.W. Brown, 8" Edition,
2014, McGraw-Hill.

4, Reference Books:

(i) Elementary Linear Algebra by S. Andrilli and D. Hecker, 4" Edition, 2012, Elsevier.

(ii) Introductory Linear Algebra: An Applied First Course by Bernard Kolman and David R.
Hill, 9" Edition, 2014, Prentice Hall.

(iii) Introduction to Linear Algebra with applications by J. Defranza and D. Gagliardi,
2012, McGraw-Hill Education.

(iv) A First Course in Complex Analysis with Applications by Dennis G. Zill & Patrick
Shanahan, 2 Edition, 2009, Jones & Bartlett.

(v) Complex Variables with Applications by A. D. Wunsch, 3% Edition, 2004, Pearson

Education

Save Paper.
we.) Save Trees.
— dg... ny £ © ASave the World.

Please Consider Your Environmental Responsibilities
Do Not Print Unless Necessary

 
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

5. Course Plan:

Module No.

A. LINEARALGFBRA (Text Book (i))

1 System of linear | L1-L4 Introduction to Systems | 1.1, — 1.2, | Solving system of linear equations
equations and | of Linear Equations, Gaussian | 1.5, 1.6 and finding inverse of a matnx
elementary row | Elimination, Elementary using row operations
operations on | Matrices and finding inverse
matrices of a matrix using elementary

row operations

2 Concepts of real | L5-L8 Real Vector Spaces, | 4.1 - 4.3 Introduction to abstract vector
vector spaces and | Subspaces, Linear Spaces, finite dimensional vector
Subspaces Independence Spaces and related concepts.

3 Concepts of | L9-L12 Basis, Dimension, | 4.4 - 4.5, Finding minimal subset of a vector

basis, dimension | Row Space, Column Space, | 4.7 - 4.8 Space to generate the complete

and rank of aj|and Null Space, Rank, Nullity vector space.

matnx

4 Linear | L13-L15 General Linear | 8.1 - 8.3 Students will be able to

Transformation Transformations, Dimension understand basic properties of

and properties theorem for linear linear transformations and to
transformations, Isomorphism check whether the transformation

is invertible or not.

5 Coordinate | L16-L17 Coordinates, Change | 4.4, 4.6, 8.4 | Applying coordinate
representation and | of Basis, Matrices for General representation to compute matnx
applications Linear Transformations of a linear transformation
elgenvectors elgenvectors. elgenvectors.

B. COMPLEX ANALYSIS (Text Book (ii))

7 To revise the | L19- L20: Review 1-11 Quick revision of complex
basic concepts of numbers and their properties.
complex numbers

8 To introduce | L21 Functions of a complex | 12,15-18 | Students will be able to evaluate
continuity and | variable. Limit and continuity the limits and continuity of
analyticity of functions in complex plane.

functions of aj/L22-L24 Derivative, CR- | 19- 26 Students will be able to check the
complex variable | equations, analytic functions, analyticity of a complex valued

harmonic functions function.

9 To introduce | L25-L28 Exponential, | 29 - 36 The present module develops an
elementary trigonometric and hyperbolic understanding of basic
functions in | functions. Logarithmic elementary functions, multiple
A Save Paper.
“ee. Save Trees.
# Save the Word

Please Consider Your Environmental Responsibilities
Do Not Print Unless Necessary

 
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

; Complex valued function, branch cut and

inverse_ functions branch point
10 To introduce | L29-L30 Contour integrals, | 37 - 44 Integration along a curve
complex anti- derivatives complex plane.
eee

Contour | L31-L32 Cauchy-Goursat | 46, Students will be able to
es and | Theorem, Cauchy Integral | 48 - 52 understand techniques to find
Applications Formula, Morera’s Theorem, integrals of different functions

Cauchy’s Inequaliy over particular contours.

L33 Liouville’s Theorem, 53 Application of complex variable
Fundamental Theorem of theory in A bstract Algebra.
Algebra

12 To introduce | L34 Taylor series, Laurent | 60, 62 | The present module develops an
series expansion, understanding of series expansion
residues and of a function analytic in an
applications annular domain and different
types of singular points.
Residue Theorem, zeros singular points.
13 Computing L37 Improper real integrals, 78-81, 85 | Application complex

improper integration to melanie improper
integrals real integral.

 

 

6. Evaluation Scheme:

No. Component — Component
ae Mid Semester Exam / | Closed/Open Book _|

each_

ComprehensiveExam | 120min, | 40 | ~————_| Closed/ Open Book

 

7. Chamber Consultation Hours (CCH): To be announced in the respective tutorial class by the respective
instructor and Google meet link will be shared for the same. Before to join google meet for CCH, students are
advised to inform well in advance to the respective instructor through mail.

8. Notices: All notices in relation to the above course will be put up on NALANDA/ Google Classroom.

eB Save Paper.
Save Trees.
\Save the World.

 

innovate achieve lead

Please Consider Your Environmental Responsibilities
Do Not Print Unless Necessary
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

9. Make-up policy: Makeup for the evaluation components will be given to genuine cases with prior permission
only.

Jitender Kumar
Instructor-In-Charge
MATH F112

hen Save Paper.
| es), Save Trees.
£7 ASave the World.

Please Consider Your Environmental Responsibilities
Do Not Print Unless Necessary

innovate achieve

 
