BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
Instruction Division

 

SECOND SEMESTER 2020-21
COURSE HANDOUT
Date: 18.01.2021

In addition to part I (General Handout for all courses appended to the Timetable) this portion gives further
specific details regarding the course.

Course Number : MATH F231

Course Title : Number Theory
Instructor-In-charge :DIVYUM SHARMA
Tutorial Instructor : DIVYUM SHARMA

1. Course Description: This is a course on number theory, one of the oldest branches of mathematics. The
course will cover the basics of elementary number theory including some of the fundamental properties of
integers, greatest common divisors, primes, congruences, Chinese remainder theorem, Fermat’s Little
theorem and similar results, integer functions, primitive roots, quadratic residues and solutions to certain
Diophantine equations.

2. Scope and Objective of the Course: This course will introduce some basic mathematical notation and
methods, covering properties of divisors, prime numbers, integer functions, equations in integers as well as
some applications. The main objective of this course is to understand the divisibility properties of integers
and other related topics as a basis for studying more advanced topics in Number Theory, Modem Algebra,
or the number theoretic RSA cryptography algorithms.

3. Textbook:
Thomas Koshy: Elementary Number Theory with A pplications, Second Edition, Academic Press,

2007.

4. Reference Books:
(i) I. Niven, H. S. Zuckerman, H.L. Montgomery: An Introduction to the Theory of Numbers,
Wiley, 1991.

(ii) W. Stein: Elementary Number Theory: Primes, Congruences, and Secrets, Springer, 2011.
(iii) Neal Koblitz: A Course in Number Theory and Cryptography, 2% Edition, Springer, 1994.

(iv) Harold Davenport & J. H. Davenport, The Higher Arithmetic: An Introduction to the Theory of
Numbers, 8th edition, Cambridge University Press, 2008.

5. Lecture Plan:

Save Paper.
ae. Save Trees.
Lr \Save the World. innovate Tol a)

Please Do Not Print Unless Necessary

 

 
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
Instruction Division

Module No. Reference | Learning Outcome
Lecture Sessions

 

 

  

 

1 L1.1 Fundamental properties, the Understanding the fundamental
summation and product notation, properties of integers
Mathematical induction, recursion, the
binomial theorem
2 L2.1-L2.3 The division algorithm, base b- | 2.1-2.2 Students will be able to check the
representation correctness of a division problem
3 L3.1-L3.4 Prime numbers, composite 2, Students will be able to explore
numbers, Fibonacci numbers, Lucas various important classes of
numbers and Fermat numbers positive integers
4 L4.1-L4.2 Greatest common divisor , Students will be able to learn the
fundamental operations on
integers
5 L5.1-L5.2 The Euclidean algorithm. . Students will be able to find the
greatest common divisor of two
numbers from prime
factorizations.
L6.1-L6.2 The fundamental theorem of , Understanding the factorization of
arithmetic any positive integer
7 L7.1-L7.2 Least common multiple, linear A-3. solving linear Diophantine
Diophantine equations equations
L8.1-L8.3 Introduction to congruences, 1-4. Understanding the fundamental
linear congruences, The Pollard Rho properties of congruences and
factoring method applications
L9.1-L9.2 Chinese remainder theorem Knowledge about four classical

 

Save Paper.
ae. Save Trees.
for ASave the World. innovate Tol a)

Please Do Not Print Unless Necessary

 
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
Instruction Division

L9.3 Wilson’s theorem

L.9.4 Fermat’s Little theorem milestone theorems in number
theory

L9.5-L9.6 Euler’s theorem

L10.1-L10.4 Euler’s Phi function, The Tau | 8.1- 8.2, Knowledge about multiplicative
and sigma functions, The Mobius function | 8.5 functions and their properties

L11.1-L11.4 The order of a positive 10.1-10.3 | Students will be able to find the
integer, Primality tests, primitive roots for order of an integer and primitive

 

primes roots of a prime

L12.1-L12.2 Quadratic residues, The 11.1-11.4 | Understanding the quadratic

Legendre symbol residues and the famous law of
a quadratic reciprocity

L12.3-L12.5 Quadratic reciprocity, The

Jacobi symbol

L13.1-L13.2 Finite continued fractions 12.1 Understanding finite continued
fractions and their use in solving
linear Diophantine equations

6. Evaluation Scheme:

 

 

 

 

 

Component Duration Weightage Date & time Remarks
(% )
Mid Term Exam 90 Min 30 To be announced Open Book
by AUGSD
2 Class tests 30 Min each 30 Exact date will be Open Book
(Quizzes) (15 each) | posted on (Quizzes may be held
Nalanda a week during lecture/tutorial
in advance hour)
Comprehensive 120 min A0 03/05 FN Open Book
Examination

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

A Save Paper.
{= save the Wortd

Please Do Not Print Unless Necessary

innovate achieve (S27 |
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
Instruction Division

 

 

7. Chamber consultation hours: To be announced in class.
8. Notices: All notices in relation to the above course will be put up on NALANDA.

9, Make up Policy: Make-up for the quiz/mid-semester/comprehensive examination will be given to
genuine cases with prior permission only.

Instructor-In-C harge
MATH F231

 

   

Save Paper.
Save Trees.

*ASave the World. A ee
Please Do Not Print Unless Necessary

 

A 7
f ,
oi
" v
