BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

SECOND SEMESTER 2020-21
COURSE HANDOUT
Date: 18.01.2021

In addition to part I (General Handout for all courses appended to the Time table) this portion gives further
specific details regarding the course.

Course No : MATH F422

Course Title : Numerical Methodology for Partial Differential Equations
Instructor-in-C harge : DEVENDRA KUMAR

Instructor(s) : NA

Tutorial/Practical Instructors: NA

1. Course Description: There are problems arising in the field of science and engineering which are
difficult to solve analytically. In that case, the best alternative is to use numerical methods. In this course,
we find the numerical solution of partial differential equations with some appropniate initial and boundary
conditions. Most of the part contains Finite Difference Methods and a few lectures have been assigned for
the Finite Volume Method.

ie)

. Scope and Objective of the Course: The study of differential equations is a fundamental subject area of
Mathematics that links important strands of Pure Mathematics to Applied and Computational
Mathematics. This course enables one to analyze a number of numerical algorithms for approximating the
solution of a variety of generic problems that occur in applications. The course will begin with the
description of the numerical techniques for PDEs, their stability, and convergence. Particular emphasis in
this course is to interconnect the theoretical results and computer implementation. Students will study not
only the solid theoretical backgrounds in developing and understanding the algorithms but also a handson experience to implement the methods.

3. Text Book:
1. Computational Techniques for Fluid Dynamics Vol. 1, by Fletcher, C.A.J, Springer.

2. Numerical Solution of Partial Differential Equations: Finite Difference Methods by Smith, G. D., 3rd
Ed., Oxford University Press.

4, Reference Books:
1. The Finite Difference Methods in Partial Differential Equations by Mitchell, R. and Griffiths,
S. D. F., Wiley and Sons, NY, 1980.
2. Numerical Methods of Partial Differential Equations by Evans, G. Blackledge, J. and Y ardley,
P., Springer, 1999.
3. A Friendly Introduction to Numerical Analysis by Bradie, 1° Edition, Pearson Education, 2007.

5. Course Plan:

No.

L1.1: System of linear algebraic equations, Review of numerical

central interpolation, difference methods for analysis
derivatives

L2.1-L2.3: Classification of PDE, nature of well- | T1: 2.1-2.4, 2.6 | Understanding of
posed problems, interpretation of PDEs by classification of

 
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

characteristics and physical basis, appropriate | appropriate ~~ | second-order PDEs as | order PD Ps 3 as
boundary/initial conditions elliptic, parabolic,
hyperbolic

L3.1-L3.3: Discretization: spatial and tme Computational solution

derivatives, an approximation to derivatives, the | T1: 3.1-3.4 procedures

accuracy of discretization process, finite

difference method for partial derivatives

L4.1-L4.4: The explicit and implicit method, | T2: pp. 11-43, Leaming of systematic

Crank-Nicolson method, derivative boundary methods to find the

conditions, the local truncation error and numerical solution of

consistency, consistency or compatibility parabolic equations and
their convergence,

L4.5-L4.8: Reduction of the local truncation | T2: pp. 137-142, | stability, and

error-the Douglas equation, three-time level | T1: 4.4 consistency.

difference equation, deferred correction method, Understand the relative

Richardson's deferred approach to the limit strengths and weakness
of each computational

L4.9-L4.12: Convergence of explicit method, | T2: pp 45-75 method

stability by matrix method, theorems on bounds

for eigenvalues, stability for derivative boundary

condition, stability, Von-Neumann method, Lax

 

L5.1-L5.8: Elliptic Equations:- Improvement of Leaming of systematic
accuracy, elliptic problems with irregular methods to find the
boundaries, SOR method for iterative methods, | R2: 2.4 numerical solution of
rate of convergence, Stone’s strongly implicit | T2: pp. 248-271, | elliptic equations and
iterative method 302-308 their convergence,
stability, and
consistency
L6.1-L6.6: Hyperbolic Equations:- Finite Leaming of systematic
difference methods on a rectangular mesh: Lax- | Tp. pp 181-195 methods to find the
Wendroff explicit method, CFL condition, numerical solution of
Wendroff implicit method, discontinuous initial hyperbolic equations
values, discontinuous initial derivatives, Dealing
discontinuities and finite difference methods, propagation of
reduction of first-order equation to a system of
ordinary differential equations

discontinuities

L6.7-L6.10: Explicit methods and implicit

methods, simultaneous first-order equations and | T2: pp 213-220

their stability

L7.1-L7.4: Finite volume method for first and mesa Understanding the
second-order PDEs and its application to Laplace | T1: 5.2 concept of finite

equation volume method

 

6. Evaluation Scheme:

Date & Time Nature of component

2
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani

Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

ee
Mid-Semester Test

Comprehensive 3h
Examination

Quiz/seminar/assignment

 

7. Chamber Consultation Hour: Th 8
8. Notices: All notices related to this course will be put only on NALANDA.

9, Make-up Policy: No makeup will be given for quiz/seminar/assignment. Make-up for Mid-Semester Test /
Comprehensive Examination will be given only in genuine case.

10. Note (if any): NA

Instructor-in-charge
Course No. MATH F422
