BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

SECOND SEMESTER 2020-21
COURSE HANDOUT

Date: 16 Jan 2021

In addition to part-I (General Handout for all courses appended to the time table) this portion gives
further specific details regarding the course.

Course No. : MBA G561

Course Title : Business Analytics
Instructor-in-charge : Nirankush Dutta

Instructor : Nirankush Dutta & Udayan Chanda

1. Scope and Objective of the Course:

Business analytics refers to the ways in which enterprises such as businesses, non-profits, and
governments can use data to gain insights and make better decisions. Business analytics is
applied in operations, marketing, finance, and strategic planning among other functions. The
course emphasizes that business analytics is not a theoretical discipline: these techniques are
only interesting and important to the extent that they can be used to provide real insights and
improve the speed, reliability, and quality of decisions. The concepts learned in this course
should help to identify opportunities in which business analytics can be used to improve
performance and support important decisions. It should make a manager alert to the ways that
analytics can be used — and misused — within an organization.

In this course, students will learn to identify, evaluate, and capture business analytic
opportunities that create value. Toward this end, students will learn basic analytic methods
and analyze case studies on organizations that successfully deployed these techniques. In the
first part of the course, we focus on how to use data to develop insights and predictive
capabilities using machine learning, data mining and forecasting techniques. In the second
part, we focus on the use of optimization to support decision-making in the presence of a
large number of alternatives and business constraints. Finally, throughout the course, we
explore the challenges that can arise in implementing analytical approaches within an
organization.

We have three goals in this course. The first is to help you think critically about data and the
analyses based on those data — whether conducted by you or someone else. The second is
to enable you to identify opportunities for creating value using business analytics. The third
is to help you estimate the value created using business analytics to address an opportunity.
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

Business analytics is an integral part of modern management — this course should provide
you with the foundation you need to understand and apply these methods to drive value.

2. Text Book:

Camm, J., Cochran, J., Fry, M., Ohlmann, J., & Anderson, D. (2014). Essentials of Business Analytics
South-Western College Publishing; International edition.

Reference Books:

R1 Albright, S., & Winston, W. (2014). Business analytics: Data analysis & decision making.
Nelson Education..

R2 Jank, W. (2011). Business analytics for managers. Springer Science & Business Media.

R3 Parr-Rud, O. (2014). Business Analytics Using SAS Enterprise Guide and SAS Enterprise
Miner: A Beginner's Guide. SAS Institute.

R4 Camm, J., Cochran, J., Fry, M., Ohlmann, J., & Anderson, D. (2014). Essentials of Business
Analytics. Nelson Education.

3. Course Plan:

Lecture Ref. To
Learning Objectives Topics to be Covered “so Text book

Introduction to Decision Making, Business Analytics Defined, A Chapter1+
Business Analytics Categorization of Analytical Methods and Models, class notes
Big Data, Business Analytics in Practice
Descriptive Statistics | Overview of Using Data: Definitions and Goals, Chapter2+
Types of Data, Modifying Data in Excel, Creating class
Distributions from Data, Measures of Location, notes+
Measures of Variability, Analyzing Distributions, Cases
Measures of Association Between Two Variables,
Data Cleansing, Case Problem
Data Visualization Overview of Data Visualization, Tables, Charts, Chapter3+
Advanced Data Visualization, Data Dashboards, class
Case Problem notes+
Cases
Descriptive Data Cluster Analysis, Association Rules, Text Mining, Chapter4+
Mining Case Problem class
notes+
Cases

 
 

Probability &
Statistical Inference

Predictive
Mining

Spreadsheet Models

Monte Carlo
Simulation

Linear Optimization
Models

Integer Linear
Optimization
Models

Optimization Models

Discrete Probability Distributions, Continuous
Probability Distributions, Selecting a Sample, Point
Estimation, Sampling Distributions, Interval
Estimation, Hypothesis Tests, Big Data, Statistical
Inference, and Practical Significance, Case Problem
Data Sampling, Preparation, and Partitioning,
Performance Measures, Logistic Regression, kNearest Neighbors, Classification and Regression
Trees, Case Problem

Building Good Spreadsheet Models, What-If
Analysis, Some Useful Excel Functions for Modeling,
Auditing Spreadsheet Models, Predictive and
Prescriptive Spreadsheet Models, Case Problem
Risk Analysis, Simulation Modeling, Simulation
with Dependent Random Variables, Simulation
Considerations, Verification and _ Validation,
Advantages and Disadvantages of Using Simulation,
Case Problem

A Simple Maximization Problem, A _ Simple
Minimization Problem, Special Cases of Linear
Program Outcomes, Sensitivity Analysis, General
Linear Programming Notation and More Examples,
Generating an Alternative Optimal Solution for a
Linear Program, Case Problem

Types of Integer Linear Optimization Models,
Solving Integer Optimization Problems with Excel
Solver, Applications Involving Binary Variables:
Capital Budgeting, Fixed Cost 618

Bank Location, Product Design and Market Share
Optimization, Modeling Flexibility Provided by
Binary Variables, Generating Alternatives in Binary
Optimization, Case Problem

An Unconstrained Problem, A_ Constrained
Problem, Solving Nonlinear Optimization Models
Using Excel Solver, Sensitivity Analysis and Shadow
Prices in Nonlinear Models, Local and Global
Optima, Overcoming Local Optima with Excel
Solver, A Location Problem, Markowitz Portfolio
Model, Forecasting Adoption of a New Product,
Case Problem

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

Chapter5 &
6+
class
notes+
Cases
Chapter9+
class
notes+
Research
papers

Chapter10
+ class
notes+
Cases

Chapter11

+
class
notes+
Cases

Chapter12
+class
notes+
Cases

Chapter13
+class
notes+
Cases

Chapter14
+class
notes+
Cases

 
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

4, Evaluation Scheme:

oer
0

| MidSemester Semester | 90 minutes _| minutes

——__

Quiz
Comprehensive — minutes — ——

 

5. Chamber Consultation Hours: Wednesday 12:00 PM to 1:00 PM (except holidays). For
emergency, students may send a mail to the concerned faculty member for scheduling an appointment

at a convenient time.

6. Notice: Notices concerning this course will be announced through Google Classroom.
7. Make-up Policy:

If the student is unable to appear for the Regular Test/ Examination due to genuine exigencies, the
student must refer to the procedure for applying for Make-up Test/ Examination. The instructor must
be informed prior to the evaluation component. Make-up for Quizzes, Assignment, Case Studies and

Projects will not be granted.
10. Note:

1. It will be the responsibility of the individual student to be regular in maintaining self-study schedule
as given in the course handout, attend lectures, submit assignments for evaluation and present any

assignment, as per the schedule announced.

2. All deadlines, as mentioned in the class, have to be strictly adhered to. Failure to do so will result in

deduction of partial / full marks for that submission.
