BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

1 ee
FIRST SEMESTER 2020-21 Date: 17 Jan 2021
COURSE HANDOUT

In addition to Part I (General Handout for all courses appended to the Time Table), this portion
gives further specific details regarding the course.

Course No.: MBA G560
Course Title: Marketing Research & Metrics
Instructor in Charge: Dr. Achint Nigam

Google Meet Link: meet.google.com/hym-rnxe-efk
Credit Units: 3

1. Course Description:

All organizations need to research their markets periodically. This course discusses in detail
various elements of marketing research process viz. problem definition, development of an
approach to the problem, research design formulation, fieldwork & data collection, data
preparation & analysis and finally report preparation and presentation. This course will also briefly
touch on the key matrices used in the field of marketing.

The emphasis of the course is proportionately focused on foundational concepts, methodology &
techniques, and marketing research applications. A number of cases will be assigned for discussion
in the class. The course pedagogy lays special emphasis on “leaming by doing’ and a project
assignment in this course characterizes this orientation.

2. Scope and Objective of the C ourse:
To impart necessary foundational concepts, methodologies and tools/techniques for role of
a market researcher. That role envisages generation of actionable information to identify
marketing problems and their solutions.

3. Text Book: Malhotra, N. K., & Dash, S. (2019). Marketing research: An applied
orientation. Pearson. (7 revised edition)
Reference Books:
a. Aaker, D. A., Kumar, V., Leone, R. P., & Day, G. S. (2018). Marketing research
11" edition. John Wiley & Sons. Adopted by Gopal Das
b. Marketing Metrics, Third Edition, Bendle, farris, Pfeifer, Reibstein

 

Page 1o0f 4
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

 

 

4, Course Plan:

I hi

Definition of marketing research, To Explain the nature and scope
marketing research process. of marketing research

Defining the market research To understand the importance of
problem and developing an and process used for defining the
approach to the problem. marketing research problem
Research designs, classification To understand the difference

of various research designs, among basic research designs;
ethical and special considerations exploratory, descriptive and causal
in intemational M.R and their application.

Distinction between primary and To explain the nature and scope
secondary data, criteria for of secondary data

evaluating secondary data, use of
internet in identifying and
analyzing secondary data
Classification of qualitative
research; focus group, depth
interviews and projective research in context of exploratory
techniques. research design.

Ch.3
Classification and comparative Ch.6 To understand survey and
evaluation of survey methods. observation methods in context of

To explain the difference between
quantitative and qualitative

Description of major observation descriptive research
methods.

Conditions of causality, role of
validity in experimentation,
classification of experimental
designs, test marketino
Measurement and scaling
procedures, nominal, ordinal,
interval, ratio. description of
comparative and non-comparative
scaling tech

Non-comparative techniques;
continuous and itemized rating
scales; Likert, semantic
differential and staple scale

To explain causality, reliability
and validity issues, and various
experimental designs in context of
causal research design.

Introduce concepts of
measurement and scaling :
Comparative scaling

Explain non-comparative
techniques

 

 

Page 2 of 4
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

Purpose, objectives and steps Ch.10 To explain the purpose, process of
involved in designing designing the questionnaire and

questionnaire. design.

Sampling design process; Ch.11 Explain sampling ; design and
sampling frame, determination of procedure

Sample size, classification of

sampling techniques.

Ch.13 Field work

Ch.16 Analysis of variance

Ch.17& | Correlation and
Ch.18 regression/Discriminant
Analysis

 

Apehssis

VI__| Report preparation, report writing | Ch.22 Report preparation and
SO lantoneeion | [pater
VII | Metrics-! Brand Asset V aluator tool,
P| etait stn
[Mets SSCA, NPV,IRR,CLTV,
[Metis —SSS~~SCSC~*éB cera, CPC, WOM

 

 

Page 3 of 4
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

5. Evaluation Scheme

; Component Weightage | Tentative dates Nature of
No. =

po: /Mid-Semester = Semester 35% | March 1-6,2021000 6, 2021

so ba May inicio May 18, 2021
Examination

3. | Assignment / Project To be completed and Qualitative +

-4 qth Quantitative
presented by March-14 study — 10%

and A pril-20" each

Other Component 5% CP/case/research TBA
contribution

e More details about the evaluation to be informed later.

 

6. Consultation Hour: Saturday’s 11 am - 12 pm.

7. Notices: Management Department Notice Board / Nalanda / Email

8. Make-up Policy: No make-ups will be given except only on genuine medical grounds and
only with prior permission from Instructor-in-charge.

9. Please be creative and careful while deciding your projects. Incase plagiarism is
found, your group will be awarded zero marks, without any makeup.

10. The instructor will not interfere in group dynamics. Free riding is part of the leaming
process, deal with it yourself.

11. Email is the preferred and best medium to communicate with the instructor.

Instructor-in-Charge

 

Page 4of 4
