BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHONOLOGY AND SCIENCE, PILANI
Pilani Campus

 

AUGS/AGSR DIVISION

SECOND SEMESTER 2020-21
Course Handout Part II
Date: 15/01/2021
In addition to Part-I (General Handout for all courses appended to the timetable) this portion gives further
specific details regarding the course.

Course No. : MBA G575
Course Title : FINANCIAL ENGINEERING
Instructor-in-charge : UDAYAN CHANDA

1. Scope & Objective:

The objective of the course is to provide knowledge about preliminary understanding of financial
engineering tools and techniques in the present market environment such as applications of Future
& Options for hedging, asset price dynamics and use of simulation in decision making. Financial
Engineering is a multidisciplinary field involving financial theory, the methods of engineering, the
tools of mathematics and the practice of programming. The Financial Engineering Concentration
encompasses the design, analysis, and construction of financial contracts to meet the needs of
enterprises. It involves the development and creative application of financial theory and financial
instruments to structure solutions to complex financial problems and to exploit financial
opportunities. The course on financial engineering would enables students to respond to the
professional requirements particularly related to investment banking, financial management,
treasury operations, asset management, risk management, consulting and capital markets etc.

3. Text book:
T1. Salih N. Neftci, Principles of Financial Engineering, Academic Press Publishers, 2009

4. Reference books:

R1. David A. Dubrofsky and Thomos W. Miller, Jr., Deivatives Valuation and Risk Management,
Oxford Unversity Press.

R2. David G. Luenberger, Investment Science, Oxford University Press
R3. Futures, Options and Other Derivatives by John C Hull, 8 Edition, Prentice Hall

R4. Derivatives Principles and Practice by Rangarajan K. Sundaram and Sanjiv R. Das, McGraw Hill
Education (India) Private Limited, New Delhi

 
 

Save Paper.
*~ Save Trees.
~ “Save the World.

Pe

 

4 Petr rr g

Please C onsider Y our Environmental Responsibilities
Do Not Print Unless Necessary
Pilani Campus

 

5. Course Plan:

Introduction to financial engineering, its
tools and techniques etc.

No.
10-13
14-17

18-20
21-29

Introduction to financial players and
markets and instruments and related
conventions.

Introduction to fixed income securities.

Basics of derivatives. Determination of
Forwards and Futures prices,

Basics of swaps and their different types
and uses.

Learning convexity of bond and yield
volatility.

Wiener process and Ito’s Lemma

Options Pricing, Option mechanics,
options engineering and its application.

Definition of financial engineering

Markets, players, instruments, orders,
deals and process of settlement.

Concept of interest rates & termstructure. Bonds basics and dynamics of
bond price, Duration & Modified
Duration, yield-maturity-price
relationship.

Basics of Futures, forwards, options &
swaps and their pay-off. Hedging
Strategies using Futures, synthetic

Swaps, types & mechanics of swap.
Framework for swaps, term structure
modeling and dynamics

Bond convexity trades and sources of
convexity

The Markov property, continuous time
stochastic processes, the process for a
stock price, the parameters, correlated
processes, Ito’s lemma, the lognormal

property

Valuation of Options, Options pricing
using Black-Scholes and Binomial
model. Greeks and their uses. Options
strategies.

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHONOLOGY AND SCIENCE, PILANI

Lecture | Learning Objectives Topics to be covered Reference (Chapter
number)

Chap 2 of T1 +class
notes

Class notes+ Chap3
of T1 + R3

Chap 5 & 13 of
T1+R1+ R3 + class
notes

Chap 9 of T1+ class
notes

R3 + class notes

Chap 8&10 of T1, +
R3 plus class notes

 

30-33 Volatility swaps, Smiles and volatility | Volatility positions, smile effects Chap 13-15 of T1 +
trading. R3+ class notes

   

; Save Paper.
em Save Trees.
innovate achieve & ae Asave the World.

 

Please C onsider Y our Environmental Responsibilities
Do Not Print Unless Necessary

 
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHONOLOGY AND SCIENCE, PILANI
Pilani Campus

 

Estimating volatilities and correlations Estimating volatility, the exponential
weighted moving average model, the
GARCH (1,1) model, choosing between | R3 + class notes
the models, maximum likelihood
methods, using GARCH (1,1) to forecast
future volatility

V-a-R, Learning Tools of financial | Understanding Vale at Risk and the | Chapter 11&12
engineering in pricing and application | Monte Carlo approach for simulation,
of fundamental theorems calibration and Quantos

 

6. Evaluation Component

Mid-Semester
Examination
ee
Case Study /Article
Presentations/ Project
or Assignment
Comprehensive 3 Hours
Examination

7. Chamber Consultation Hour: 12 Noon -Thursday

 

8. Notice: All notices will be displayed on Department of Management Notice Board.

Instructor-In-Charge

; A Save Paper.
Save Trees.
innovate t Asave the World.

Please C onsider Y our Environmental Responsibilities
Do Not Print Unless Necessary

 

 
