BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHONOLOGY AND SCIENCE, PILANI
Pilani Campus

 

INSTRUCTION DIVISION
SECOND SEMESTER 2020-21
Course Handout Part II
Date: 18/01/2021
In addition to Part-I (General Handout for all courses appended to the timetable) this portion gives further
specific details regarding the course.

Course No. : MBA G559
Course Title : Corporate Finance
Instructor-in-charge : Dr. SAURABH CHADHA

1. Brief Course Description:

The course introduces students to the concepts of corporate finance, markets, financial securities,
time value of money, risk and return, cost of capital, investment decisions, capital management,
capital structure, shareholder rewarding policy and impact of corporate taxes on several key
decisions. It does not assume students to have any prior knowledge in any sub-domain of Finance
like investments, valuations or banking etc. However, a preliminary exposure to basic financial
accounting and familiarity with financial statements is expected.

2. Scope and Objectives of the Course:

This course aims at introducing students to the fundamentals of corporate finance, theories,
concepts and the process of financial decision making. The structure of the course will enable
students to appreciate the integration between financial markets, business environment and the role
of finance manager in maximizing firm and shareholders' wealth. Refer to detailed content wise
discussion appended below in section five.

3. Text book:

Eugene F. Brigham, and Joel F. Houston, Fundamentals of Financial Management, 11" edition, Cengage
Learning or Later.

4. Reference books:

A. Richard A. Brealey and Stewart C. Myers, Principles of Corporate Finance, 6/e, 2003, Tata
McGraw-Hill Publishing Company Ltd.

B. Lawrence J. Gitman, Principles of Managerial Finance, 6/e, 1991, Harper Collins
Publishers.

C. LM. Pandey, Financial Management, 11/e, 2015, Vikas Publishing House, Pvt. Ltd.

D. Damodaran Aswath, Corporate Finance: Theory and Practice, 2/e, John Wiley & Sons,
Inc.2001.

E. Prasanna Chandra, Financial Management: Theory and Practice, 6/e, 2005, Tata McGraw
Hill,

F. Arthur J. Keown, John D. Martin, J. William Petty, David F. Scott, Jr.. Financial
Management, 9/e. (2002) Prentice Hall

   

; Save Paper.
em Save Trees.
innovate achieve & ae Asave the World.

 

Please C onsider Y our Environmental Responsibilities
Do Not Print Unless Necessary

 
 

Pilani Campus

5. Course Plan:

10-11

12-14
15-18

Learning Objectives

Introduction to
Finance, Markets,
Instruments and
Financial
Management
Time Value
Money, Risk and
Return, Bond
Valuation and Stock
Valuation

of

Portfolio theory and
asset pricing models,
Beta estimation

Basics of derivatives.
Determination of
Forwards and
Futures prices.
Learning about
arbitrage and __ its
conditions.

Analysis and Impact
of Leverage

Cost of Capital

Capital
Decisions

Budgeting

 

Topics to be covered

Introduction to financial Management, Introduction to
financial players and markets and instruments and related
conventions

Concept of interest rates & term-structure. Bonds basics
and dynamics of bond price, Duration & Modified
Duration, yield-maturity-price relationship. Valuation of
shares, Two stage growth, equity capitalization rate,
linkage between share price, earnings and dividends,
Introduction to concept of risk, return on a single asset,
risk of rates of return: variance and standard deviation,
historical capital market returns, expected return and risk
Portfolio return, portfolio risk, risk diversification, Capital
asset pricing model, the arbitrage pricing theory, Beta
Estimation and the cost of equity

Basics of Futures, forwards, options & swaps and their
pay-off. Arbitrage, rationale of arbitrage assumptions
and various examples and situations of arbitrage.

Distinguish among the concepts of operating leverage,
financial leverage, and combined leverage; Calculate the
firm's degree of operating leverage, financial leverage,
and combined leverage

Understanding the application of cost of capital in
business decisions, Describe the concepts underlying the
firm's cost of capital (technically, its weighted average
cost of capital) and the purpose for its calculation.
Calculate the after-tax cost of debt, preferred stock, and
common equity

Discuss different types and importance of capital
expenditure decisions on _ business _ sustainability,
Understanding various non-discounted and discounted
cash flow methods and their application in capital

 

Please C onsider Y our Environmental Responsibilities

 

Do Not Print Unless Necessary

 

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHONOLOGY AND SCIENCE, PILANI

Reference
(Chapter
number)

Text BookCh.1 and 4,
Class notes

Text BookCh. 5, 6, 7,
and 8; Class
notes

Reference
Book: IM.
Pandey

Ch. 5, 6;
Class notes
Text BookCh. 18; Class

notes

Text Book:
Ch. 14; Class

notes

Text Book:
Ch. 10; Class

notes

Text Book:
Ch. 10, 11
and 12; Class
notes

Save Paper.
~. Save Trees.
* Agave the World.
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHONOLOGY AND SCIENCE, PILANI
Pilani Campus

 

expenditure decisions, Understanding limitations of
discounted and non-discounted cash flow evaluation
methods and exploring best possible option, Analyzing
various risk involved in capital expenditure - Scenarios
Analysis, Sensitivity Analysis
Working Capital | Background on Working Capital, Current Asset | Text Book:
Management Investment Policies, Current asset financing policies, Cash | Ch. 16 and
(WCM) conversion cycle, Cash budget, Cash and Marketable | 17; Class
securities, Inventories, Account Receivable, Trade-Credit, | notes
Bank loans, Commercial Paper, Accrued Liabilities, Use of
security in Short-term financing
Capital Structure | Understanding Theories of Capital Structure, Asymmetric | Text Book:
and Dividend Policy | Information Theory - Pecking Order Theory; | Ch. 14 and
Understanding financial distress and agency cost; | 15; Class
Understanding the factors affecting capital structure; An | notes
approach to setting the target capital structure;
Understanding dividend versus capital gains: What do
investors prefer?; Appreciating rationale behind stable
dividend policy; Understanding other means of rewarding
to the shareholders - Bonus Share, Stock Options, Stock
Split, Share Buyback, etc

 

6. Evaluation C omponent

1 Mid-Semester 20
Examination
2 [QuizandProject | |B
3 Comprehensive 40 10/5/2021 AN CB
Examination

7. Chamber Consultation Hour: TBA

 

8. Notice: All notices will be displayed through G oogle Meet.

Instructor-In-Charge

 

; Save Paper.
em Save Trees.
innovate achieve & ae Asave the World.

Please C onsider Y our Environmental Responsibilities
Do Not Print Unless Necessary

 
