BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY & SCIENCE, PILANI (RAJ)

In addition to part I (General Handout for all courses appended to the time table) this portion gives further
specific details regarding the course
COURSE HANDOUT (II SEMESTER 2020 — 2021)

COURSE NO. : MBA G558
COURSE TITLE : OPERATIONS AND SUPPLY CHAIN MANAGEMENT
Instructor In-charge : DR. SATYENDRA KR. SHARMA

 

Scope and Objective

The course provides students with the opportunity to get clarity and insight into the phenomenon of
Operations and Supply Chains and their management. It will assist them in understanding of operations
across the supply chain. SCM is not as a technology issue but rather a business strategy for companies
trying to create new competitive advantage.

i. Attain familiarity with the fundamentals of Operations and Supply Chain Management and its use in
organizations seeking to create differentiation.

ii. Understand issues in implementing Supply Chain Management and e-fulfilment in a web enabled
world.

Pedagogy
The course will be taught in the way of lectures, case discussions, class exercises.

Text Book

Text Book (T!): Roberta S. Russel and Bernard W. Taylor III, Operations and Supply Chain
Management, Eight Edition, Wiley Publisher

T2 Sunil Chopra, Peter Meindl and D V Kalra, “Supply Chain Management: Strategy, planning
and Operation”, Pearson Education, Fifth Edition, India, 2012

Reference Books

R2: David Simchi-Levi and others, " Designing and managing the supply chain "Third Edition,
Tata McGraw-Hill, 2010

R3 Janat shah “Supply chain Management Text and Cases “‘ Pearson Education Second edition
2009

R4 Heizer and Render Operations Management, 12" Edition, Pearson

Website:
Council of supply chain management professionals website “www.cscmp.org”
Plan of C ontact Sessions

Learming Objectives Topics to be covered TB Chapter
xo. No.

Operations and Supply Chain | Operations Function, Evolution of T1 Chapter 1
Strategy Operations, Productivity and

Competitiveness, Strategy and

Operations

3-4 Ensuring Quality Quality definitions, QMS, Quality T1 Chapter 2
tools, TQM, Quality in Services, The
cost of Quali
Process Capability and Basis of SPC, Control charts for T1 Chapter 3
Statistical Process Control attributes, Control charts for variables,

Control chart patterns , Process
Capability

Product Design The design process, Rapid prototyping | T1 Chapter 4
and Concurrent design, Design quality
reviews, Design for environment,
Quality function deployment

pe jose Services The service economy, Characteristics | T1 Chapter5
of services, Service design process,
Tools for service design

io 12 Process = Process Proce enning: Proce Aneta Process Analysis, T1 easel 6
Pecos Desgs | Broce Femning. Frocem Anais, Innovation

_— 14 Planning Facilities and Facility layouts, Capacity Planning, T1 ee 7
Capacity Process layouts, Product layouts,
———* brid layouts
ee

isd whats is “WhetisSusply Chan Chain Describe the cycle and push/ pull view | T2 Chapter 1
Management & how of a supply chain Identify the key
does it create V alue? supply chain decision phases.

Goal of supply chain & impact of

supply chain decision on the success of

a firm

company’s overall success.
- Supply Chain Drivers Identify the major drivers of supply T2. Chapter
and Obstacles chain performance. Discuss the role 3
each driver plays. Describe the major
obstacles that must be overcome to

manage a supply chain successfully.

| Atticle Discussion |
21-22 Designing the Designing the distribution network ina | T2. Chapter

 
distribution network supply chain, Network design in the
supply chain, Network design in
uncertain environment

23-26 Planning demand and Demand forecasting in supply chain, T2. chapter

supply in supply chain Aggregate planning in the supply 7, 8,9

chain, Planning supply and

demand in the supply chain: Managing

predictable variability
Planning and managing Managing economies of scale in the T. chapter
inventories in a supply supply chain: Cycle inventory, 10,11 & 12
chain Managing uncertainty in the supply

chain: Safety inventory, Determining

optimal level of

product availabili
Coordination and Coordination in the supply chain, T. chapter
Technology in the Supply Information technology and the supply | 10 & 16
Chain chain, E-business and

supply chain

34-38__| Project Presentations ee
a

 

Evaluation Scheme

Nature

Mid- Semester 90 Min. ee |_| Closed book
Exam

Comprehensive — pf % Closed book
Exam and 50% Open
Book
3. | Class Participation | ee p | Open book
in case anicipation |
4, | Project 20 Min each a _ ee book
Assignments Presentation
Team Formation: Students have to give presentation in a team. Each team will be assigned a
topic and a presentation of 20 minutes will be taken. Teams will be formed in class.

 

Chamber Consultation hour: Tuesday, 5 to 6 PM.

Notices: All notices concerning this course will be displayed on the Management Group Notice
Board only.
Instructor In-charge
