 

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

 

 

Date:16/01/2021
In addition to Part-I (General Handout for all courses appended to the time table) this
portion gives further specific details regarding the course.

Course No : ME F343

Course Title : Mechanical Vibration
Tnstructor-in-charge : Arun Kumar Jalan

‘Tutorial Instructor : Arun Jalan, S S Y adav, G Watts

1. Course Description:

Small oscillations of linear dynamical systems, free and forced vibrations of single and multi
degree-of-freedom systems, normal modes and orthogonality relations, generalized co-ordinates and
Lagrange's equations, matrix formulation, eigen-value problem and numerical solutions, transient
response of one-dimensional systems, approximate energy methods, continuous system, vibration of
string, rods, bars and beams. Introduction to control systems.

2. Course Objectives:

Course Objectives

CO1 | Provide an introduction to analytical dynamics and present Lagrange’s equations of motion
which is an efficient way of deriving equations of motion.

Present a matrix approach to the vibration of SDOF and MDOF systems, placing emphasis
on modal analysis. To cover methods suited for automatic computation for obtaining the
system response.

CO3 | Response of aSDOF system under harmonic forces and transient forces.

CO4 | Setting-up initial-boundary value problems for some important and fundamental structural
members viz. Bars, strings, rods and beams. Analytical and approximate solutions to these
problems for various loading and boundary conditions are discussed and analyzed.

 

3. Learning Outcomes

A Save Paper.
gy) Save Trees.
£ P= &Save the World.

 

innovate achieve

Please Do Not Print Unless Necessary
 

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

“ Learning Outcomes

An ability to apply mathematical knowledge to an engineering problem by developing the
equations of motion for vibratory systems and solving them.

 

Understanding importance of how structural vibrations may affect safety and reliability of
engineering systems.

Relation between Vibration and Control

4, Course Material

Text Book:

T1: "Theory of Vibration with Application", Thomson W. T., Dahleh M. D., Pearson Education,
54 Ed.

Reference Books:

Ri: "Mechanical Vibration", SS Rao, Pearson Education, 4th Ed

R2: "Elements of Vibration analysis", Leonard Meirovitch, McGraw-Hill, Singapore, 1986.

 

5. Course Plan:
Lect. Topics to be covered Learning Objective Reference
No Chap./Sec
Introduction to Oscillatory . . T1-CH1
0-4 Free Vibrations of single degree | Concept of natural frequency and system damping
of freedom system properties T1-CH2

Responses due to harmonic forces and_ their
practical application such as vibration isolation,
vibration measuring instruments

Harmonic Forced Vibration of
SDO System

 

 

Save Paper.
ae) Save Trees.
£ > Save the World.

innovate

Please Do Not Print Unless Necessary
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

excitations.
motion for a discrete system
15-16 Modal analysis, Coupling co-ordinates, Vibration
freedom (2 DOF) absorber
Computational methods for | Orthogonality principle, Modal analysis for MDOF | T1-CH7
17-20 | MDOF system system: Matrix iteration method (Iteration, &
Deflation)
21-24 | Approximation methods: | Approximate natural frequencies for discrete | T1-CH 10
eee ee
equation, Holzer method
25-28 .
String, Rods, Beams mechanical systems

5Continuous system: , ; .
29-31 Rayleigh's method, Rayleigh-Ritz method, T1- CH10
9

 

Approximate solution

Introduction to Control system Basic Introduction of control system

6. Evaluation Scheme:

Evaluation Duration Weightage Marks Date and | Remarks
Components (min.) (% ) time

 

7
TOTAL

7. a. Tutorial : There will be four evaluative tutorials, each of 10 marks. All are surprise in nature.
b.Quiz =: Two Quiz will be there. Dates will be announced.

 

8. Chamber Consultation Hour: Through Google meet link : The link will be shared in CANVAS

9, Notices: Notice, will be givenin CANVAS

Instructor-In-C harge
ME F343

 

 

A Save Paper.
gy) Save Trees.
£ P= &Save the World.

innovate achieve

Please Do Not Print Unless Necessary
