 

 

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
Instruction Division

SECOND SEMESTER 2020 - 2021
Date: 18.01.2021
Course Handout (Part II)

In addition to Part-I (general handout for all courses in the time-table), this handout provides
specific details regarding the course.

Course No.: ME F461

Course Title: Refrigeration and Air-conditioning
Instructor-in-charge: Dr. Suvanjan Bhattacharyya
Co-Instructors; = 3 —~— ----
1. Course Description: This course will teach the basic principles of refrigeration and air-conditioning to
students, including the design and analysis of refrigeration and air-conditioning systems.

2. Scop

e and Objective of the Course: The course is designed to give an in depth study of theory of

refrigeration and air-conditioning and their applications. The technique of analysis and design of
refrigeration and air-conditioning systems will also be discussed.

3. Text
1

Books:

. Text Books: Arora, C.P. Refrigeration and Air-conditioning, 3rd Ed., McGraw-Hill India,
2009.

4, Reference Books:

1.
2.
3.

e

Pleas

Arora, R.C. Refrigeration and Air-conditioning, Prentice Hall India, 2010.
Stoecker,W. Jones J. Refrigeration and Air Conditioning 2nd Ed.

Faye C. McQuiston, Jerald D. Parker, Jeffrey D. Spitler, Heating, ventilating and air
conditioning: analysis and design, 6th ed., Wiley, 2004.

P N Anathanarayanan, Basic Refrigeration and Air Conditioning, 4" Ed., 2013, McGraw-Hill
Education.

Rajput, R. K. Refrigeration and Air-conditioning, 4“ Ed., 2015, S. K. Kataria and Sons.

Save Paper.
\ Save Trees.

Asave the World. innovate FTes CoN =)
e do not print unless necessary

 

Page 1
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
Instruction Division

 

 

5. Course Plan:

No.
Introduction and review 1,2 Concepts of Refrigeration and Airconditioning. Unit of _ refrigeration,
Refrigerants.

Simple Vapour Vapour compression cycle on ph and T-s

Compression diagrams, Vapor compression systems

Refrigeration calculation, Cycles with sub-cooling and

System (Simple VC RS) Superheating, their effects, actual Vapour
Compression Cycle.

3-6 Refrigerants Designation, comparative study’. of
refrigerants and their selection, chemical
and physical requirements, and substitute
of refrigerants.

7-9 Vapour Absorption Advantages of VARS over VCRS.

Refrigeration System Working principle of simple VARS,

(VARS) practical VARS. Limitations of VARS,
maximum COP of a VARS, Lithium
bromide-water System; Aqua-ammonia
systems.

10-11 Air Refrigeration System 11 Bell-Coleman refrigerator. COP
(ARS). determination, actual air refrigeration
Cycle.

Major Refrigeration Compressors: Types; reciprocating, rotary
Equipment. & centrifugal,
Condensers: types used in refrigeration
systems;
Evaporators: types and heat transfer in
evaporators.
Expansion devices: types of expansion
devices and capillary tubes and ejector
expansion.

 

Save Paper.
he Save Trees.
£ e ‘Asave the World. innovate Fela) (a=) Te¥=Te |

Please do not print unless necessary

 

Page 2
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
Instruction Division

16 Psychometry of _ air 14,15 and | Basic definitions and principles related to
conditioning Processes. Class Notes | Psychometry ; Psychometric Charts &
Their Uses;
Heating, Cooling, Heating &
Humidification & Cooling &

 

 

 

 

Dehumidification processes. A diabatic
Saturation, Cooling Coils, By-pass Factor.

- 20
Notes
Human Physiology Notes Thermodynamics of human body.
Load calculations. Sensible Heat Factors. Heat Load
Notes estimation: Simple cases of Cooling and
Dehumidification.
Solar C ooling Solar cooling technologies.

36 — 37 Air-conditioning Class Notes | Air-handling units, Cooling Towers.
equipment.

Non-conventional cooling | Class Notes | ODP, GWP, TWEI
techniques

6. Evaluation Scheme:

(% )
Presentation 15 mins. 15 Will be Open book
announced

Quiz 20 mins. 05 Will be Open Book
announced (Multiple
Choice
Questions)

 

Mid Semester Test <TEST 1> Closed book

Comprehensive Test 3h (15 +30) <TEST C> Close Book
and
Open Book

7. Consultation Hours (Instructor In-charge): Time: 3.00-4.00 PM, Monday.

 

8. Notices: All notices related to this course will be put on the Nalanda/Email.

Please do not print unless necessary

Page 3
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
Instruction Division

 

 

9, Make-up Policy:

1. Make up will be given to genuine students only, but prior permission is required.
2. No makeup for lecture test.

10. Note:

I). NC will be given to students obtaining overall marks less than 20% of the total (less than 20 out
of 100).

Il). Mid-semester grading: It will be announced normally in the month of March. It is done in the
same manner as that of the final grading.

III). Presentation: One before Mid-semester test and one before Comprehensive test.

IV). Quiz: One quiz (MCQ) would be conducted after mid-semester.

Instructor-i
Dr. Suvanjan Bhattacharyya
ME F461

   

Save Paper. , a
Save Trees.

£ >= \save the World.
Please do not print unless necessary

 

innovate achieve

Page 4
