 

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
Instruction Division

 

 

 

SECOND SEMESTER 2020 — 2021

Course Handout part II
Date : 17th January 2021

In addition to part — I (General Handout for all courses appended to the timetable), this portion gives
further specific details regarding the course.

Course No. : ME F433

Course title : SOLAR THERMAL PROCESS ENGINEERING
Instructor-in-Charge: Dr. Manoj Kumar Soni

Scope and Objectives:

Renewable energy sources have lately acquired a prominent place in energy policy decisions of
countries all over the world. Sun is an inexhaustible source of clean energy which can be converted
into useful heat and electrical energy in solar thermal and photovoltaic systems. Solar Thermal
Processes play important role in these systems.

This course aims at enabling students to explore opportunities for research & development in the
challenging area of solar thermal systems for various applications, by gaining exposure to the
principle of their operation, construction, manufacturing technologies, system and components
design & sizing, and analysis of techno-economic performance of the systems. The course offers
ample opportunities for planning self-study, application of knowledge gained to practical situations,
and honing skills required for undertaking independent study and research. Students are
encouraged to engage with authentic web-resources of Government (MNRE) and other leading R &
D Institutions for consolidating individual understanding.

Text Book:
1. “Solar Energy: Fundamentals, Fundamentals & Applications”, H.P. Garg, J. Prakash, First
Revised Edition, Tata McGraw Hill., (2000).

Reference Books:

1. “Solar Engineering of Thermal Processes”, John A. Duffie, William A. Beckman, Third
edition, John Wiley & Sons, (2006)

2. Concentrating Solar Power Technology: Principles, Developments and Applications edited
by K Lovegrove, W Stein, Woodhead Publishing, 2012

3. MNRE publications and research papers (will be shared during class)

 

innovate

 

A Save Paper.
Ze Save Trees.
f= ‘Save the World.

Please Do Not Print Unless Necessary
 

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
Instruction Division

 

M Reference Learning outcomes
No.
1 Class Notes Introduction: World and India solar energy
resources. Brief overview of solar thermal systems.
2
3
5
6

 

TB Chapter 1 Solar Radiation and Solar Collectors:

Ri Chapter 1, 2.1- | Extraterrestrial solar spectrum. Beam, diffuse and

2.16 global solar radiation. Calculation of total solar
radiation incident on a tilted collector surface. Solar
collector types — non-concentrating and focusing
collectors.

TB Appendix Heat Transfer in Solar System Components : Heat
(Heat Transfer) transfer modes: conduction, convection, thermal
radiation. Conduction in plane and _ cylindrical
walls: temperature distribution and heat transfer
rate. Convection: natural and forced. Heat transfer
coefficient and heat transfer rate for laminar and
turbulent flow of fluid. Overall heat loss coefficient
of a solar collector.
TB Appendix Thermal Radiation: Black and grey bodies.
(Heat Transfer) Thermal radiation laws _ (Planck’s,  StefanR1 Chapter 3.1- Boltzmann and_ Kirchhoff's laws). Optical
3.7, 3.10, 4.1-4.4, properties of solid surfaces: absorptivity,
4.7-4.10 reflectivity, transmissivity and emissivity. Energy
exchange by radiation between two grey surfaces
with simple geometry: two parallel planes, convex
body and enclosure.
TB Chapter 2.1- Non-Concentrating Solar Collectors: Flat plate and
2.6, 3.8-3.12 evacuated glass tube collector: thermal analysis,
R1 Chapter 6.1- performance (collector heat output rate and
6.4, 6.11-6.12,6.16, | efficiency). Collector types used for heating water
6.17, 6.23, 6.24 and air. Design calculation (examples).
TB Chapter 3.1- Concentrating Solar Collectors: Concentrating
3.10 collector types: line and point focus concentrators
R1 Chapter 7.1, with receivers. Thermal analysis of parabolic
7.2, 7.12, 7.16 trough concentrator.
Performance and efficiency of concentrating
collectors. Tracking mechanisms. Applications:

 

solar process heat and power generation systems.

 

innovate

 

Save Paper.
< ale Trees.
> “Save the World.

Please Do Not Print Unless Necessary
 

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
Instruction Division

Module | Lecture Reference Learning outcomes
No. Session

7 26-32 TB Chapter 16.1- | Thermal Energy Storage: Sensible and latent heat
16.5 storage systems. Storage media: liquid and solid;
R1 Chapter 8.1- phase-change materials (PCM). Storage capacity,
8.10 rates of storage charging and discharging, storage
operation cycle.

33-40 TB Chapter Solar Thermal Systems: Solar water and space

 

4,8,9,10,12,14 heating and cooling (active and passive) systems:

R1 Chapter 12-17 | types, components, load calculation, solar fraction,
fossil-fuel back up, system heat output, collector
and storage sizing. Solar drying and sea (brackish)
water distillation. Solar thermal power generation:
solar energy to power conversion cycles,
concentrator types, system useful power output,
fossil-fuel back-up, heat storage. System design
calculations (examples). Solar thermal system
economics.

9 | 41-42 pf Review session

Evaluation Scheme:
Existing:

Evaluation Duration Weightage | Date & Time Rem.
Component

pProject | 8% | Take Home

evaluation
MidSemTest* |90Min [25% | id Ontine

e All the notices related to this course will be put up Nalanda only.

e Chamber consultation hours: Discussed in the class

e Make-up will be granted for genuine cases only. Certificate from authenticated doctor from the
Medical Center must accompany make-up application (only prescription or vouchers for medicines
will not be sufficient). Prior permission of IC is compulsory.

 

 

Instructor-in-Charge
ME F433

 

— Trees.
~$Save the World. innovate

Please Do Not Print Unless Necessary

A Save Paper. Pe

 
