 

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

SECOND SEMESTER 2021-2022
C ourse Handout Part II

Date: 18/01/2021

In addition to part -I (General Handout for all courses appended to the time table) this portion gives
further specific details regarding the course.

LPTU : 3003

Course No. : ME F340

Course Title : Introduction to Sports Engineering

Instructor-in-Charge : M.S. Dasgupta

Team of Instructors — : Pintu Modak, Rajesh P Mishra, Dr. Achint Nigam, K P Venkatesh,

1. Course Description: The course essentially prepares engineering students to utilize their existing
technical knowhow for sports applications. Specific focus is on Mechanics, Materials, Design principles
and data analysis. The course introduces students to sports biomechanics, analysis of human movement
in sports, Force and motion analysis using various standard techniques, sensors, data analysis and
performance measure. Sports equipment and surface property affecting performance and injury.

2. Scope & Objective: This is an introductory course to impart knowledge and skill set related to working
with human in sports engineering application. Understanding human movement pattern and
performance measurement. Understand, assess and analyze effect of equipment, sports surfaces and
environment on sports performance. Use of ergonomic concepts, image processing, smart sensors and
data analysis in sports engineering. Standard techniques of evaluation and testing of sports equipment
and sports surfaces and appreciation of business around sports industry.

3. Learning outcome: On successful completion of this course, students will be able to:

a) Explain what is sports engineering application domain.
b) Demonstrate how to frame a sports engineering related problem and apply suitable engineering
solution.
c) Assess effect of sports surfaces and equipment on sports performance.
d) Demonstrate use of information technology tools for performance analysis.
4. Text Books:
(T1) Sport and exercise biomechanics - P. Grimshaw, New Y ork: Taylor & Francis, 2007
(T2) Introduction to Sports Biomechanics: Analysing Human Movement Patterns, 2nd edition by Roger
Bartlett, Routledge Publishing, 2007
5. Reference Books:

 

i Save Paper.
ae Save Trees.
£P© Save the World.

(R1) Materials in sports equipment — Mike Jenkins, Woodhead Publishing 2003 UK
(R2) Kinesiology: Scientific basic of human motions, By Katharina F Wel’s and Kathryn Luttgens, 6th
Edition, Philadelphia

 

 

 
(R3) The Science and Engineering of Sport Surfaces Edited by Sharon Dixon, Paul Fleming, Iain James,

Matt Carré

(R4) Database systems: a practical approach to design, implementation and management (5th edition),

Connolly, Thomas M. and Carolyn E. Begg, Addison-Wesley 6" Edition, 2015

(R5) The Routledge Handbook of Ergonomics in Sport and Exercise Youlian Hong, 2014

Routledge

6. Course Plan:

Module
3
B

—_

 

 

 

Lecture | Chapter,
session Section
duration | (Book)
nour
Sports and Technology
Introduction to Sports engineering and ch 7 2
sustainability
Objectives and scopes. of _ sports Sen 1 2
engineering
Connecting engineering with — sports
development.
Human Movement Patterns
Defining human movements Sec: 1 5 3,4
Some fundamental movements and
Movement patterns, qualitative and
quantitative methods
Ergonomics and Anthropometry
Introduction to ergonomics, system design se 2,5
and task analysis
Introduction to anthropometry and _ its See: 5 3
application in sports.
Anthropometry measures and
anthropometric techniques
Performance Analysis of Sports
Movements Sen
What is Performance Analysis of Sport? 1,2,4,6
Quantitative and Qualitative Analysis,
Sports Performance Data and Information
Computer application in sports
Computerized Performance Analysis
Systems and AI
Business around Sports Reading
Introduction to sports as a product and material
a service. Pricing and promotion will be
strategies in sports marketing. supplied
Sports Infrastructure and Surfaces R3
Basics of sports Infrastructure. Sec:1,2,3
Planning design and management of R5
sports infrastructure. History and Sec:6
development of sports Surfaces, surface
Classification and _ characterization,
surface test methods. Sports Surfaces

 

b iM heen we

Learning outcome of
module

Learning fundamental
skills that Engineering
students require to
understand sports
movements. Technology
and sports ethics.

Learning human

movement patterns and
their analysis

Learning basic human
factors in engineering
design

Learning modern
computing technology and
its use 1n sports
performance analysis

Learning about marketing
opportunities of sporting
events and business around
Sports.

Learning key aspect of
sports infrastructure
surface development,
testing and effect on
performance

 

 
 

and Performance. Chemistry of Sports oe
surface.

Equipment C ase Studies: Visualize situations that
Materials and design of sports products engineers need to analyze

— balls, tennis rackets, cricket bats, and appreciate in Sports
bicycles, running shoes, pole vaults, engineering problem and
surfaces and training equipment case scope of business around
studies and measurements sports

 

4, Evaluation Scheme:

. Weightage Duration .
Evaluation Component (Minutes) Date of Evaluation
As announced in the

Timetable

Mid Semester Test

 

ef wo
Take home
i t
assignments 35
°

Comprehensive 3
Examination

Chamber Consultation Hour: To be announced in the class.

As announced in the Timetable

Notices: Notification in Nalanda.

Make-up policy: Make-up for Midsem, Compre, only to take care of exigencies.

 

 

i Save Paper.
ae Save Trees.
£P© Save the World.
