Birla Institute of Technology & Science, Pilani
Hyderabad Campus

 

INSTRUCTION DIVISION
SECOND SEMESTER 2020-2021
Course Handout Part II
Date: 01-01-2021
In addition to part-I (General Handout for all courses appended to the time table) this portion gives further
specific details regarding the course.

Course No. : MEF452
Course Title : Composite materials and design
Instructor-in-Charge : Faizan Mohammad Rashid

Scope and Objective of the C ourse:

Composite Materials have gained considerable importance over the years due to their outstanding mechanical
properties, less weight, flexibility, ease of fabrication, corrosion resistance, impact strength and fatigue
resistance. Introduction to composites, concepts of reinforcement, strengthening mechanisms, fibrous
reinforcements, matrix materials, micro-mechanical aspects of composites, manufacturing methods, composite
production design methods, design of tensile members, pressure vessels, storage tanks, and other chemical
process equipment made of FRP, design of joints, damage of composites by impact, FRP grids, recent
development in manufacturing of composites and technologies.

Textbooks:
1. Composite materials, K.K. Chawala, 2nd ed., (1987) Springer-Verlag, New Y ork.
Reference books
1. Analysis and Performance of Fiber Composites - BD Agarwal, L J Broutman and
K Chandrashekhara, Wiley, 3™ Edition, 2006
2. Mechanics of composite materials, Robert Jones, Taylor & Francis (2"™ Edition).

Course Plan:

Chapter in
Learning objectives Topics to be covered the Text
; Book
Definition and Introduction, applications and
1-2 constituents of classification of composites fibers and Chi1-T1,R1
9

composites matrices, distribution of constituents,

Tvpes of Reinforcements; Glass, Carbon, Aramid ,
3 1B metallic and non-metallic fibers, Ch2-T1,R1
reinforcements ;
Manufacturing of fibers

; Types of matrix : Ch3-T1,
Polymers, metals and ceramics Ch2-R1

 
. Effect of interface on Interfaces, Wettability, Interactions and Ch4-T1,
8-9 ' ; bonding at interfaces, Tests to measure
composite behaviour |.
interfacial strength
various composites yup, Dag J‘ a Ch2-R1
and preformed molding composites
Strenath and modul Micromechanics of composites; Behavior
13-16 sf aunidirections i. of unidirectional lamina, Predictive Ch10-T1,
composi models: Longitudinal modulus and Ch3-R1
posite 4: ;
longitudinal strength and other properties
Application of basic | Important terminologies in composites:
17.99 _| Stress-strain relations to | 3D stress-strain relations; Isotropic, Chi11-T1,
different class of transversely isotropic, orthotropic Chs-R1
materials materials, analysis of orthotropic lamina

Failure of orthotropic Transformation of stresses and strains Ch1L-TH,
Maximum stress, Maximum strain and
lamina Deny a Ch5-R1
Maximum work (Tsai-Hill) criteria

Strain field in a laminate
96-32 Analysis of multi-layer | Resultant forces and moments in a Chi1-T1,
composite laminated composite Stiffness matrix of Ch6-R1
laminate, Special laminate sequences:
Failure of composites due to longitudinal
, i. ; Ch12-T1,
33-36 Failure criteria tension and compression and out of plane
Ch9-R1
loadino
Strengthening mechanisms in composite
37-41 Design of composites | Design procedures, design of tensile Chi4-T1,
for various loads members, Design of pressure vessels and Ch9-R1
storage tanks

Evaluation Scheme:

Component Duration Sade Date & Time NEUTE @
(% ) Component
on experiments
Xamination

Chamber C onsultation Hour:
To be announced in the class, Chamber: NAB 6020E

 

 

   
Notices: All notices related to this course will be put on CMS only.

Make-up Policy:

Make-up will be granted ONLY in genuine cases with prior permission. The request application for make-up
test must be reached to the Instructor-in-charge before commencement of the scheduled test (documentary proof
is essential).

 

INSTRUCTOR-IN-C HARGE

 
