BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

SECOND SEMESTER 2020-21
COURSE HANDOUT (PART II)
Date: 17.01.2020

In addition to part I (General Handout for all courses appended to the Time table) this portion gives further
specific details regarding the course.

Course No : ME F441
Course Title : Automotive Vehicles
Instructor-in-C harge : Dr. Saket Verma

1. Course Description:

Automotive vehicle systems, vehicle performance; internal combustion engines; analysis and design of vehicle
components. Experimental or theoretical investigation of problems selected from the field of automotive
vehicles. Brief description of electric and hybrid electric vehicles.

2. Scope and Objective of the C ourse:

This course has been designed to make the students familiar with the fundamentals of automotive vehicles.
It deals with the principle of operation and performance of internal combustion engines, along with working,
analysis and design of various components of automotive vehicles. In addition to that current development
and future scope of automotive vehicles will also be discussed.

3. Text Books (T.B.):
1. Joseph Heitner, Automotive Mechanics — Principles and Practice, - Affiliated East West Press, 2nd
edition, 1980.
2. N.K. Gin, Automotive Mechanics, Khanna Publishers, 1996.

4. Reference Books (R.B.):

1. J.B. Heywood, Internal Combustion Engine Fundamentals. Mc Graw Hill Book Co. New Y ork.
1988.

2. V.Ganeshan, Internal Combustion Engines, Tata McGraw-Hill, 2nd edition, 2003.

3. Kripal Singh, Automobile Engineering, - Vol. 1 & II, Standard Publishers & Distributors, 1995.

4, Stan C. Alternative propulsion for automobiles. Springer; 2017

5. Course Plan:

Learning Objectives No of Lecture Reference
Hour C hap./Sec.# (Book)

Introduction and Overview 2 Class notes

Thermodynamics of Prime Movers: Ideal air standard cycles, T.B. 1: Chapter 3,

fuel-air cycles and actual cycle; ignition and combustion in spark R.B. 1: Chapter 1,

ignition and diesel engines; construction of I.C. engines R.B. 2: Chapter 1-5
Engine Design and Operating Parameters: [mportant engine R.B. 1: Chapter 2,

characteristics; geometrical properties; brake torque, power and R.B. 2: Chapter 17
efficiencies, design and performance data.

The Air and Fuel System: Carburetion, engine mixture T.B. 1: Chapter 8,
requirements, simple carburetor. calculation of air fuel ratio, fuel T.B. 2: Chapter 3,
injection system in petrol and diesel engines

 
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

R.B. 2: Chapter 810

The Power Train: Flywheel, friction clutches, torque T.B. 1: Chapter 14converters, transmissions and driveline, types of driving shafts 20, T.B. 2: Chapter
and joints, 5-6,

The Cooling System: V ariation of temperature distribution, T.B. 1: Chapter 10,
theory of engine heat transfer and correlations, parameters T.B. 2: Chapter 2,

affecting engine heat transfer, air-cooled systems, types of R.B. 2: Chapter 14
water-cooling systems radiators, fans

The Lubrication Systems: Causes of engine friction, function T.B. 1: Chapter 6,

of lubrication, mechanism of lubrication, journal bearing R.B. 2: Chapter 13
lubrication, types of lubrication systems, lubrication of engine

components.

components, analysis of drum and disk brakes. T.B. 2: Chapter 8,
suspension types and design

Engine Emissions and C ontrol: Exhaust system, emissions
from IC engines, emission norms, emission control strategies. R.B. 1: Chapter 11
Advances in Automotive Vehicles: Modern IC engines and R.B. 4: Chapter 4
advances, hybrid electric vehicles, electric vehicles, fuel cell Class notes
vehicles.

 

6. Evaluation Scheme:

Component Duration | Weightage Date & Time Nature of component
(Minutes) (% ) (Close Book/ Open Book)

Mid-SemesterTest | 90 | 30. | TBA Open Book
20

Projects and Dates to be Open Book
Seminars announced in the
class

Open Book
Examination

7. Chamber Consultation Hour: Will be announced by instructor in the class.
8. Notices: Notices will be displayed in Nalanda. The students should also check their mails regularly.

9, Make-up Policy: Make-up will be given only to the genuine cases for Mid Semester and Comprehensive
exams only. The request application for make-up test must reach the Instructor-in-charge one day before the
commencement of scheduled test (documentary proof is essential).

10. Quizzes: There will be two quizzes. One based on the syllabus before Mid Semester and other based on
the syllabus after Mid Semester. No makeup in any circumstance for the objective quizzes.

Instructor-in-charge: Saket Verma
Course No. ME F441
