BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

SECOND SEMESTER 2020-21
COURSE HANDOUT
Date: 15.01.2021

In addition to part I (General Handout for all courses appended to the Time table) this portion gives further
specific details regarding the course.

Course No: ME Go15

Course Title: COMPUTATIONAL FLUID DYNAMICS
Instructor-in-C harge: Dr. Shyam Sunder Y adav

Instructor(s) : ---
Tutorial/Practical Instructors: ===

1. Course Description: This course is an introduction to the various computational techniques for fluid
dynamics. Following topics will be considered: Philosophy of Computational Fluid Dynamics, Governing
equations of fluid dynamics, Mathematical behaviour of partial differential equations of fluid dynamics and
their impact on CFD, Finite difference and finite volume discretization techniques on structured and
unstructured grids, Numerical solution of steady and transient convection-diffusion equation, Solution
techniques for compressible and incompressible Navier-Stokes equations, Various methods for solving
system of linear equations, Techniques for turbulent flows.

2. Scope and Objective of the C ourse: This course is intended to develop the numerical skills for solving
the equations governing fluid flow, heat & mass transfer and related transport phenomena. The students first
learn how to derive the governing equation using fundamental laws of mass, momentum and energy
conservation. Once the equations are derived, the student will learn how to simplify and classify the
equations mathematically and how to interpret their physical and mathematical behavior? Subsequently the
course focuses on the different discretization techniques for the governing equations like the finite difference
and finite volume method. The student will learn how to select the right numerical scheme which correctly
mimics the behaviour of partial differential equation they want to solve. They will also learn how to ensure
that the numerical scheme is stable and the data from the numerical solution procedure is a valid
representation of reality? Finally, the students will learn different CFD techniques for compressible and
incompressible flows and will apply these for solving simple flow problems. As part of this course, the
students have to complete a project of practical relevance using any licensed commercial / open source
flow solvers. Most students prefer to use Ansys Fluent and OpenFOAM flow solver for their projects.

3. Text Books:

T1: J.D.Anderson , Computational Fluid Dynamics, Mcgraw Hill Inc., 1995, 6th Edition.
T2: Versteeg and Malajasekra: An introduction to computational fluid dynamics: The finite volume

method, 2" edition, Pearson

4, Reference Books:
R1: JH Ferziger, M Peric, Computational methods for Fluid Dynamics, Springer, 2002, 3™ Edition.
R2: Jiri Blazek, Computational Fluid Dynamics: Principles and A pplications, Elsevier, 2015, 3™ Edition
R3: Charles Hirsch, Numerical computing of internal and external flows, Vol. 1, Elsevier, 2"¢ Edition
R4: Pletcher, Tannehill, Anderson, Computational fluid mechanics and heat transfer, CRC
press, 3™ edition,
1
 

5. Course Plan:

Module No.

Lecture re

la: CFD asa beatdaneel Tool, CFD asa
Design Tool, The Impact of CFD,
Applications of CFD

2a-2b: Derivation of G overning equations
of fluid dynamics

2c-2d: Classification and characteristics of
governing equations

2e: Forms of equation for compressible
flow

3a-3c: Introduction to Finite difference
method, Finite difference schemes for
model equations, Explicit and Implicit
approaches

3d-3f: Consistency, stability and
convergence of numerical schemes,
Numerical diffusion and dispersion,
Artificial viscosity

4a-4c: Solution techniques for system of
linear equations

5a: Introduction to finite volume method
5b: FVM for diffusion equation on
unstructured and structured grids

5c-5d: FVM for convection-diffusion
equation on structured and unstructured
grids

5e: FVM for transient equations

6a: Lax-wendroff and Maccormack scheme
6b: Application of Maccormack scheme to
quasi 1D nozzl flow

6c : Application of Maccormack scheme to
2D Prandtl-Meyer expansion wave

 

Reference

T1, chapter 1

T1, chapter 2,
chapter 3

T1 chapter 4,
R3 chapter 4
and
chapter 7,
R4 chapter 4

T2 chapter 7,
R1 chapter 5,
R3 chapter 10

T2 chapter 4,
chapter 5

T 1 chapter 6,7
and 8

7a: Pressure velocity coupling in T1 chapter 9,
incompressible flows T2 chapter 6

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

Learning outcomes

Why CED is important?
Where it has been applied?
General CFD work flow
procedure.

What are the equation which
govern fluid dynamics? How
to derive these? What is their
physical significance? How to
classify equations into
hyperbolic, parabolic and
elliptic types? Characteristics
of different equation types,
Forms of governing equations
Suitable for compressible
flows

Introduction to Finite
difference method, Finite
difference schemes for model
hyperbolic, parabolic and
elliptic equations, Explicit
and Implicit approaches,
Concepts of consistency,
stability and convergence,
Aspects of Numerical
dissipation and dispersion;
Artificial viscosity

Solution techniques for
system of linear equations,
Various Direct and Iterative
techniques

Introduction to finite volume
method, Finite volume
method for steady and
unsteady convection diffusion
equations on structured and
unstructured grids

Simple CFD techniques 1:
Lax-Wendroff scheme and
MacCormack's scheme for
compressible Navier-Stokes
equations, Numerical solution
of quasi-1D nozzle flow, 2D
Prandtl-Meyer expansion
wave

Simple CFD techniques 2:
Pressure correction technique
for incompressible Navier

 
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

7b-7c: Projection method for Stokes equations like
incompressible flows Projection method, SIMPLE
7d-7f: SIMPLE family of algorithms for family of algorithms for
incompressible flows pressure velocity coupling,
7g: Numerical solution of the lid driven Application to lid driven

Computational models for Turbulent flows T2 chapter 3, Governing equations for
Ri chapter 9, | Turbulent flows, RANS
R2 chapter 7 models, LES, DNS

 

6. Evaluation Scheme:

Component Duration | Weightage Date & Time Nature of component
(% ) (Close Book/ O pen Book)

Mid- Semester Test As per AUGSD Closed book

Examination open book

| - | 30 | ~~ Will be announced

CFD Project

7. Online C onsultation Hour: Will be decided in the class.

 

8. Notices: Personal emails will be sent
9, Make-up Policy: No makeup for any component

10. Note (if any): You should have a laptop which you will use to complete the project. Y ou have to give
a live demonstration of the procedure you followed while completing the project. Y ou have to submit a project
report consisting of the following: Abstract summary, Introduction to the problem including the previous
works / literature on the problem, Governing equations, Procedure followed, Results and discussions and
finally, Conclusion.

Instructor-in-charge
ME G515 CFD
