BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

SECOND SEMESTER 2020-21
COURSE HANDOUT

 

Date: 18.01.2021

In addition to part I (General Handout for all courses appended to the Time table) this portion gives further
specific details regarding the course.

Course No : MF F418
Course Title : LEAN MANUFACTURING
Instructor-in-C harge : ABHIJ EET K. DIGALWAR

1. Course Description:

Fundamentals of continuous improvement, value added and waste elimination, elements of lean production: small lot
production, setup time reduction, maintaining and improving equipment, pull production systems, focused factories
and group technologies, work cells and cellular manufacturing, standard operations, quality of design, systems for
eliminating defects, simplified production planning and control systems: scheduling for smooth flow, synchronizing
and balancing process, planning and control in pull production, beyond the production systems: managing the supply
chain, activity based costing, performance measurement.

2. Scope and Objective of the C ourse:

In factories around the globe, Toyota consistently raises the bar for manufacturing, product development and process
excellence. The result is an amazing business success story: steadily taking market share from price-cutting
competitors, earning far more profit than any other automaker, and wining the praise of business leaders worldwide.
With a market capitalization greater than the value of General Motors, Ford and Chrysler combined; Toyota is the
world’s most profitable automaker. Toyota’s well known “secret weapon” is lean manufacturing — the revolutionary
approach to business processes that it invented in the 1950’s and has spent decades for perfecting. Today business
around the world is attempting to implement Toyota system to maintain competitive advantage. But are they?

The course explains Toyota’s unique approach to Lean manufacturing, that drive Toyota’s quality and efficiency
obsessed culture. You will valuable insights that can be applied to any organization and any business process, whether
in services or manufacturing. You will discover how the right combination of long term philosophy, processes, people
and problem solving can transform your organization into a lean, learning enterprise — the Toyota way.

At the end of this course, the students will be able to understand the importance of lean manufacturing / The Toyota
Way as a strategic weapon, the students will be able to understand the World —Class power of the Toyota way

3. Text Books:

T1. Pascal Dennis, "Lean Production Simplified", 2nd Edition, Productivity Press, 2007.

T2. Jeffrey K. Liker, “The Toyota Way”, MaGraw-Hill Edition, New Delhi, 2004.

4, Reference Books:

R1 James P. Womack and Daniel T. Jones, “Lean Thinking: Banish Waste & Create Wealth in Your Corporation, Revised
Edition, Simon & Shuster, 2001.

R2 Nicholas, John M., “Competitive Manufacturing Management”, Tata McGraw Hill Education Pvt. Ltd. New Delhi,
2012
 

5. Course Plan:

Module No.

Birth of lean
production

Lean production
system

Stability and
Standardized work

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

Lecture Session eference | Learning outcomes
1-2

ee T1 Chi, | Types of production systems, growing dysfunction,

R2 Chi birth of lean production, virtue of necessity, lean
revolution at Toyota

T1Ch2_ | Whylean production? Systems and systems thinking,
R2 Ch3 basic image of lean production, customer focus,
Muda, Mura and Muri, Toyota’s Seven Wastes

Standards in lean system, Continuous Improvement,
5S system, total productive maintenance

Just-In-Time and
Jidoka

Why JIT, principles of JIT, JIT system, pull systems,
R2 Ch 5, 6 | kanban, kanban rules, Small lot production, setup
time reduction, SMED methodology, development of

Jidoka concept, why jidoka, expanded role of
conveyance, production levelling, Poka Yoke,
VSM Process, TAKT time, analysis of data, symbols,
benefits, Visual Management, Kaizen, Case Studies

T1Ch5
and Class
Notes
T1Ch7, 8
and 9
T2 Ch 15,
16 and 17

Value Stream
Mapping

Involvement and
Customer Focus

Why involvement? The terrible waste of humanity,
activities supporting involvement, Leadership
development, people development, supplier
development, kaizen circle activity, practical kaizen
training, suggestion programs, what is planning? Why
plan? problems with planning, hoshin planning,
hoshin planning system, four phases of hoshin
planning, what is lean culture? How does lean culture
feel?

T2 The world-class power of the Toyota way, Toyota way
in action

 

6. Evaluation Scheme:

(% ) (Close Book/ O pen Book)
CB/OB
Examination
CB/OB

Assignments/Class 35% TBA
Test/Group Project

7. Chamber C onsultation Hour: Friday 3.00 PM
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

 

 

8. Notices: All notices regarding the course will be communicated through Nalanda/ERP/email.
9, Make-up Policy: No Make-up for class tests and non-appearance in class tests may lead to NC.
10. Note (if any):

Instructor-in-charge
Course No. MF F418
