 

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

 

 

Date: 17/01/2021

In addition to Part-I (General Handout for all courses appended to the timetable), this portion gives
further specific details regarding the course.

Course Code : MF F485
Name of the Course : Sustainable Manufacturing
Instructor-In-Charge : KULDIP SINGH SANGWAN

I. Scope and Objective of the C ourse
Growing awareness and concerns about climate change, energy security and natural resource scarcity led

by the rapid expansion of economic activity in the last two decades have put government and business
under immense pressure to optimize the natural resources, to increase use of renewable energy and
recycled material and to reduce the environmental effects involved in the production and consumption of
goods and services. The primary objective of this course is to provide environmental, economical and social
perspective of manufacturing processes, systems and tooling including material, energy and toxicity
analysis during the various phases of product life cycle. A multidisciplinary approach will be undertaken.
Collection and analysis of real world data from industry will be encouraged.

II. Textbook

1. KS Sangwan, A K Digalwar and Monica Sharma, 2011, Sustainable Manufacturing, EPH, New Delhi (soft
copy)

III. Reference Papers

1. VK Mittal, 2013, Development and Validation of Drivers for, Barriers to and Stakeholders of Green
Manufacturing, Phd Thesis, 2013, BITS Pilani
https://shodhganga.inflibnet.ac.in/handle/10603/25544?mode=full

2. KS Sangwan, Development of a multi criteria decision model for justification of green manufacturing
systems, International Journal of Green Economics 5 (3), 285-305

3. KS Sangwan, Performance value analysis for justification of green manufacturing systems
Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Systems 5 (1), 59-73

4. KS Sangwan, Evaluation of manufacturing systems based on environmental aspects using a multi—
criteria decision model, International Journal of Industrial and Systems Engineering 14 (1), 40-57.

5. Yovana M.B. Saavedra, Ana P.B. Barquet , Henrique Rozenfeld , Fernando A. Forcellinic, Aldo R. Ometto,
Remanufacturing in Brazil: case studies on the automotive sector, Journal of Cleaner Production, 2013,
1-10

6. AM King, SC Burgress, W ljomah and CA McMahon, Reducing waste: repair, recondition, remanufacture
or recycle?, Sustainable Development, Vol 14, 2006, 257-267.

7. Christoph Herrmann; Marcus Mansour, Marc Mateika, Strategic and Operational Life Cycle
Management — Model, Methods and Activities, Proceedings of the 12th International CIRP Seminar on
LCE 2005, Laboratoire 3S, Grenoble,France, April 3-5, 2005

8. KS Sangwan, AK Digalwar, V Bhakar, Life Cycle Assessment and Comparison of CRT, LCD and LED
Monitors, Procedia CIRP, 2015, Vol 29, pp. 433-438.

Save Paper.
ae) Save Trees.
£ > Save the World.

innovate

 

Please Do Not Print Unless Necessary
 

IV. Course Contents

1. Introduction

2. Sustainable
manufacturing
implementation
factors

3. Sustainable
manufacturing
design

4. Life cycle
management and
assessment

5. End of life (EOL)
strategies

 

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

Bn ae
9. Kuldip Singh Sangwan, Vikrant Bhakar, Shilpa Naik and Sylvi Nazareth Andrat, Life cycle assessment of
incandescent, fluorescent, compact fluorescent and light emitting diode lamps in an Indian scenario,
Procedia CIRP, Vol 15, 2014, pp 467-472.
10. S. G. Lee, S. W. Lye and M. K. Khoo, A Multi-Objective Methodology for Evaluating Product End-of-Life
Options and Disassembly, Int J Adv Manuf Technol (2001) 18:148-156
11. Nicola Morelli, Developing new product service systems (PSS): methodologies and operational tools,
Journal of Cleaner Production 14 (2006)
12. Anil Jindal, Multi-objective Design and Optimization of a Closed-loop Supply Chain Network, and
Assessment of Collection Methods, Product Recovery Methods and Network Configurations, PhD
Thesis, 2015, BITS Pilani.
13. Vikrant Bhakar, development of a sustainability assessment framework for manufacturing industry, PhD
Thesis, 2018, BITS Pilani.

Learning Objectives

Overview, WEEE, triple bottom
concept of — environment,
economy and society

Drivers for, barriers to, and
stakeholders of sustainable
manufacturing

Eco-innovation, design for
environment, design for
disposal, design for energy
efficiency, design for material
efficiency, sustainable
materials, sustainable energy
Strategic and operational
evaluation of technologies
using life cycle concept, MET
analysis, environmental

impact assessment, various
impact assessment models,
End-of-life strategies
product definition,
logistics

and
reverse

Learning Outcomes

To understand the effect of
manufacturing on sustainable
development in terms of
environmental, economic and social
impacts.

To find and analyze the drivers,
barriers and stakeholders.

To prioritize the drivers, barriers
according to industry, government
and expert perspectives.
Classification of stakeholders.

To understand the importance of
design for various sustainability
elements.

To understand the concept and
importance of life cycle
management.

To do life cycle assessment of
products and processes based upon
end-point and mid-point categories.
To understand the 3R concepts from
design and operational perspectives.

 

Number

of

Lectures

Save Paper.
ae) Save Trees.
£ > Save the World.

 

innovate

Please Do Not Print Unless Necessary
 

 
  
  
  
 

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

Number
Learning Objectives of
Lectures

6. Sustainability To develop critical factors, resource

assessment Readiness assessment and | perspective and assessment models

sustainability assessment
framework

7. Circular economy | objectives, design and | To develop a framework and critical
and sustainable framework of a circular | factors for design of a circular
manufacturing economy economy

8. Sustainable Integrated product policy, | To develop PSS business models
business models sustainable product service

systems, green factories
9. Sustainable Integration of pre- To develop integrated supply chain
supply chains manufacturing, manufacturing | mathematical models

and post-manufacturing

activities for sustainability
10. Industry 4.0 and To understand the — sustainable
sustainable Role of industry 4.0 in manufacturing from Industry 4.0
manufacturing sustainable manufacturing perspective

11. Case studies To practice life cycle To develop life cycle assessment
assessment on LCA softwares models using case studies.
f

12 Sustainability Integrating sustainability at To understand the role
Games the strategy level using sustainability viz-a-viz other business
business game in teams strategies

V. Evaluation Scheme and Schedule

EC Component Duration | Weightage | Date, time, venue
No. (minutes) (%)

4 [Project | | 40 | Continuous evaluation

Comprehensive exam

VI. Chamber Consultation Hour: To be announced in the first class.

 

Vil. Notices concerning the course: All notices concerning the course will be displayed on the Nalanda.
Vill. Make-up Policy: Make-up will be permitted only in genuine cases with prior permission.

IX. Grading: If a student gets less than the 20% of the toper marks then he/she is liable to get an NC grade

Instructor-In-Charge
MF F485

Save Paper.
*~ Save Trees.
* Agave the World. A ee oe

Please Do Not Print Unless Necessary

 
