BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

SECOND SEMESTER 2020-2021
COURSE HANDOUT

 

Date: 015.01.2021

In addition to part I (General Handout for all courses appended to the Time table) this portion gives further
specific details regarding the course.

Course No >MF F341

Course Title : DESIGN OF MACHINE TOOLS
Instructor-in-C harge : Dr. Sharad Shrivastava
Instructor(s) : Dr. Sharad Shrivastava

Tutorial/Practical Instructors:

1. Course Description: This course is built upon the premise that the students already has a fairly good
knowledge of fundamental subjects like Manufacturing Processes, Engineering Materials, Design of Machine
Elements etc. This course will mainly focused on fundamental principles of machine tool design. Also this
course will provide exposure to the students on modern development of machine tools like NC/CNC
machines.

2. Scope and Objective of the C ourse:The Course is intended to focus the student’s attention on the concepts of
design, analysis and features of different types of machine Tools, different machine elements to make a machine tool
and new concepts in machine tool engineering.

The course covers introduction to machine tool drives and mechanisms- general principles of machine tool
design,regulation of speed and feed rates, design of machinetool structures, design of guideways andpower screws,
design of spindles and spindlesupports, dynamics of machine tools, control systemsin machine tools

The students are encouraged to select seminar topics of current interest and developments in the fields of
technology of construction of Machine Tools and present them in the class apart from the regular classroom
learning.

3. Text Books:NK Mehta,” Machine Tool Design and Numerical Control’, second Edition, Tata McGraw Hill book
Company, (2011)

4, Reference Books:
R1 SK Basu, DK Pal,’Design of Machine Tools”, Oxford & IBH Publication Co Pvt Ltd, New

Delhi (1995)

R2 Gopal Chandra sen & Amitabha Bhattacharya,”Principles of Machine Tools”, New
Central Book agency, Calcutta,(1998)

R3 B.L. Juneja, G.S. Sekhon and Nitin Seth, “Fundamentals of Metal Cutting

and Machine Tools”, New Age International Publications, Delhi. 2010

R4 A.B. Chattopadhyay, “Machining and Machine Tools” Wiley-India (2011)
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

5. Course Plan:

1-2
3-6
7-1

Understanding the machine tools, their Textbook/Refer | Fundamentals of Machine
functions ence books/ Tool Design, Design

Lecture notes Considerations, General
requirements

Understanding the drive systems Textbook/Refer | Review of the mechanisms
ence books/ for transmission of motion,
eo Lachire notes principles of Mechanical
Drives
8 Understanding the gear box design Design of Speed & Feed
See
19-22 Understanding machine tool structural Design of machine Tool
design structures for forces,
stresses, and deflection
28-30 Understanding the functions of guide- Design of Machine Guide
ways ways, and Power screws,
Analysis of slides and
Guides
31-33 Understanding the machine tool spindles Spindles and spindle
and supports Supports, Bearings and
load and deflection
analysis
34.37 Overview of all machine tool vibrations Dynamics of Machine
Tools, Vibrations and
dynamic rigidity
38-40 Understanding control systems

6. Evaluation Scheme:

Component Nature of component
(Close Book/ O pen Book)
Mid-Semester Test in. CB

Comprehensive CB/OB

 

Examination

 

”

7. Chamber C onsultation Hour:To be announced in the class.

8. Notices:All notices concerning the course will be displayed on the mechanical engineering department notice
board and online on nalanda.

9, Make-up Policy: Make-up will be permitted only in genuine cases with prior permission. No make-up for class
room assignments/Tutorials/quizzes.
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

10. Note (if any):

Instructor-in-charge
Course No. MF F341
