 

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

 

SECOND SEMESTER 2019-2020
Course Handout (Part IT)

In addition to part I (General Handout for all courses appended to the time table) this portion gives further
specific details regarding the course.

Course No.: MSE Gbi11
Course Title : Mechatronics

Instructor-in-Charge : Dr. Prateek Kala

1. Scope and Objective of the C ourse:

This course is intended to a comprehensive knowledge of the technology related to Mechatronics. The necessity of
integrating and embedding electronics and microprocessor into mechanical systems have been long felt, due to rapid
progress in microprocessor computer based technology, in domestic products to manufacturing systems. Mechatronics
is a recently defined engineering field that builds on the traditional mechanical engineering studies, combines it with
technologies from the electrical, electronics, computer and control fields, using techniques such as simultaneous
engineering to provide solutions in manufacturing applications. Also, mechatronics has been applied to manufacturing
and other industrial automation: robotic automation found in car automated production lines, such as welding, and
assembly line in computer integrated manufacture etc. Thus, the manufacturing system is greatly enhanced by the
application of mechatronics. This course will develop overall background of the student in interdisciplinary mechatronic
technology and a broad introduction to the issues encountered and techniques required in developing mechatronic
products and automation systems.

2. Lext books

T1. Bolton W., Mechatronics, 3ruEd., Pearson, 2004. [1.

3. Reference books

(1) M.P. Groover, “Automation, Production systems, and Computer-Integrated Manufacturing”, PHI, 2008. [2]
(ii) Stadler, W., Analytical Robotics and Mechatronics, McGraw Hill, 1995. [3]
(iii) Mechatronics, HMT Ltd., TMH, 1998. [4]

4, Course Plan

A Save Paper.
ge. Save Trees.
£°* Save the World.

innovate

 

Please Do Not Print Unless Necessary
 

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

Lec | Topic
1 Introduction to course

2-4. Introduction to Arduino microcontroller and its
programming

9-6 Sensors and A ctuators
7-11 | Signal conditioning
12-15 | Transfer function and system modelling
16-20 | Controllers implementation using Matlab Simulink
21-23 | Communication between devices
24-30 | Hydraulics system and analysis
-34 | Electro-pneumatics
35-37 | PLC
8-40 | Display devices

— 1

 

E

5. Evaluation Scheme:

Evaluation Duration Weightage Date, Time & Venue | Nature of
Component Component

Mid Sem Test

90min | 380
Surprise T ests/ Dates to be
Quizzes / announced in the
Assignments/ class
Projects and
seminars

Comprehensive 2 Hrs 22/6 AN TBA
Examination

6. Chamber consultation hour: To be announced in the class.

 

7. Notices: All notices regarding the course will be displayed only on Mechanical Engineering Department
notice board.

8. Make-up Policy: Make-up will be granted ONLY in genuine cases with prior permission. The request
application for make-up test MUST be reached to the Instructor-in-Charge before commencement of the
scheduled test along with DOCUMENTARY PROOF. No make- up will be allowed for the Surprise Quiz
Tests.

*TBA: To Be Announced

Instructor-in-C harge,

 

A Save Paper.
gy) Save Trees.
£ P= &Save the World.

innovate achieve

Please Do Not Print Unless Necessary
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

 

MSE G511

 

 

Save Paper. >
ge) Save Trees. 4
£ > “Save the World.

innovate achieve
Please Do Not Print Unless Necessary
