BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

SECOND SEMESTER 2020-2021
C ourse Handout (Part II
Date: 17/01/2021

In addition to part-I (General Handout for all courses appended to the time table) this portion gives further
specific details regarding the course.

Course No. : PHA F417
Course Title : Pharmacoeconomics
Instructor In-Charge: Dr. Murali M Pandey

1. Course description: This course is designed to understand and apply the principles of
pharmacoeconomics and pharmacoeconomic research through lectures, readings, class participation, and
individual assignments. It identifies the role of pharmacists in pharmacoeconomics research and to
appropriately use the vocabulary of pharmacoeconomics.

2. Scope and objective of the course:

The principal objective of this course is to impart knowledge about some economic aspects of the health
care and its applications in the health sector, with a focus on pharmaceuticals. It covers cost-benefit, costeffectiveness, cost-minimization, and cost-utility analyses to compare the different pharmaceutical
products, drug therapy and treatments. Economic concepts such as supply, demand, efficiency, equity,
health policy, market failures, health insurance, and pharmaceutical market are covered. Measurement of
direct and indirect costs to a health care program, economic issues, pharmaceutical regulations, pricing
policy and other economic related topics will be emphasized.

3. Text Book:

1) Bootman J. L., Townsend R. J., McGhan W. F. Principles of Pharmacoeconomics. Second edition,
Harvey Whitney Books Company, Cincinnati, USA, 2002.

4, Reference Books:

1) Gold M. R., Siegel J. E., Russell L. B., Weinstein M. C. Cost-Effectiveness in Health and Medicine,
Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK, 1996.

2) Michael F. D., Sculpher M. J., Torrance G. W., O’Brien B.J., Stoddart G. L. Methods for the Economic
Evaluation of Health Care Programmes. Third edition, Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK, 2005.

3) Walley T., Haycox A., Boland A. Pharmacoeconomics. Churchill Livingstone, Elsevier Science,
Oxford, UK, 2004.

5. Course Plan:

 

; Save Paper.
Zs. Save Trees.
mg... £ >= Asave the World.

Please Consider Your Environmental Responsibilities
Do Not Print Unless Necessary

 
 
  
 

to pharmaco- | L.2. Overview of pharmacoeconomic

economics

Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

TB1
methodologies; A pplications; Chapter 1

L.3.Guidelines; Challenges and limitations

2.  Pharmaco- TB1
economics:
international
perspective

L.4. Potential intervention points;
L.5-6. Global status guidelines and health
Care systems

An Chapter 2;

3.Cost determi- | L. 7. Cost of illness, cost of therapy,
nation and | L.8-9. Framework for determining costs

; a Chapter 3
analysis and pharmacoeconomic applications.

4, Methods

cumvee L.20. Introduction, health state utility
assessment,
L.21-22. Concept of utility, methods of | TB-1,
assessing utility, Chapter 6
L.23-24. Health care interventions, case

 
  
 
  
  

5. Health relat
ed quality of life ete vemponents of health related TB-l
(HRQoL)- An quality of lite measures, Chapter 7
L.29-30. General health concepts.

overview

6.Decision

L.10. Introduction, measurement of benefit,

L.11-13. Steps in conducting cost-benefit TB1analysis (CBA), Chapter 4
L.14. Case studies

L. 15.Principles of cost effective analysis
TB-1
(CEA), Chapter 5;
L.16-17. Theoretical foundations for vee
; RB-1
valuing cost in CEA, various
L.18-19. Framing and designing CEA, case chapters

of Studies

studies.
L.25. Concept of cost minimization,

  
   

sources of clinical trial evidence, Class
; Notes and
L.26. Other issues in evaluating Slides

equivalence

L. 31-34. Application in
. . TB-1
pharmacoeconomic study to improve
a ; Chapter 8
decision making process

Analysis

7. Applications L. 37-38,
of pharmaco
economics

various health
care settings

L. 35-36. Clinical research,

development process, ret

Applications Chapter

. | pharmacoeconomics in clinical trials
mn TB-1

L.39-41. A pplication of research in clinical | Chapters
practice and healthcare settings 14,11, 12

& 13

Pe

 

innovate Flot al (atic)

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani

Orientation to the background of
pharmacoeconomics

Overview of the international status of
pharmacoeconomics

Understanding of various aspects of
cost determination

Complete understanding and
applications of CBA

Knowledge and applications of CEA

Incorporation of the concept of utility in
healthcare systems

  
  
  
  
   

Overview of cost-minimization study

Building a thorough concept of
(HRQoL)

Understanding of the methods used in
decision analysis

Exposure to the pros and cons of
incorporation of PE in CR

Applications of PE in other healthcare
settings

A Save Paper.
ay. Save Trees.
£ >= ASave the World.

Please Consider Your Environmental Responsibilities

 

Do Not Print Unless Necessary
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

6. Evaluation Scheme:

wage) | oa Tine

 

Compre Exam 120 min

Continues assessment Continuous EE CB a
(Quizzes /case studies /

assignments /

presentation)

7. Mid-Semester Evaluation: Will be announced after the Mid--semester test.

8. Grading Procedure: It is not mandatory to award all the grades (i.e. A to E); subjective judgment
will be exercised while awarding the grades. In borderline cases subjective judgment based on
regularity and performance in all the components throughout the semester will be exercised to
decide the final grade.

9, Make-up: Make-ups are not generally given as a routine. It is solely dependent on the
“genuineness” of the circumstances under which a student fails to appear in a scheduled
evaluation component; however, prior permission should be sought from _ the
instructor-in- charge.

10. Notices: Pharmacy Notice Board.

11. Any further detail (if required) will be announced in class.

12. Chamber C onsultation Hour: To be announced in the class.

Instructor In-C harge
PHA F417

Save Trees.
Save the World.

yp i Save Pane

 

innovate achieve

Please Consider Your Environmental Responsibilities
Do Not Print Unless Necessary

 
