BIRLA INSITTUTE OF TECHONOLOGY & SCIENCE, PILANI
Pilani Campus

 

INSTRUCTION DIVISION
SECOND SEMESTER 2020-2021
Course Handout (Part - II- B)

Date: 16" January,2021

In addition to part | (General Handout for all courses appended to the time table) this portion gives further specific
details regarding the course.

Course No. : PHA G614

Course Title : CLINICAL PHARMACY AND THERAPEUTICS
Instructor-in-Charge : R.MAHESH

Practicum Experience/ Assignment* —: To be announced

1. Scope and Objective of the Course :

This course is designed to enlighten the students in the field of clinical pharmacy, an emerging area in
therapeutics. Basic concepts of clinical pharmacy and its applications, pharmaco-kinetics, laboratory data
analysis, drug interactions and adverse drug reactions, therapeutic drug monitoring, development of drug
information systems will be covered. Emphasis will also be made on health care management.

2. Text Books ( TB ):

(i) Walker, Roger & C. Whittlesea Clinical Pharmacy & Therapeutics, Churchill Livingstone, 4th ed., 2007

(ii) Helms, Richard A & Eric T. Herfindal Textbook of Therapeutics Lippincott, 8th ed., 2006

3. Reference Books ( RB ):

a) Nick Barber and Alan Willson-"Churchill's Clinical Pharmacy Survival Guide"- Churchill Livingstone, | Ed.,
1999

b) Karen J. Tietze-"Clinical skills for Pharmacists- A patient focused approach"-Mosby, Inc., | Ed., 1997

c) Gopal B Saha-"Fundamentals of Nuclear Pharmacy"-Springer-Verlag, Inc.,
IV Ed., 1997

d) Robert G Petersdorf, et al.,-"Harrison's Principles of Internal Medicine"- McGraw-Hill International Book
Co., X Ed., 1985.

e) Richard Ravel-"Clinical Laboratory Medicine'"-Mosby, Inc., VI Ed., 1995
2/...

Page lof 4
BIRLA INSITTUTE OF TECHONOLOGY & SCIENCE, PILANI
Pilani Campus

 

Learning objectives* Topic Lectures Book(s) for Reference

Policy:
Practice of clinical pharmacy 1-3 TBb-1; RBa-1-4; RBb-1,3,10
Clinical trial design 4-6 RBa-5; RBe-1;35,36
Pharmaco-economics 7-9 TBa-8; RBa-7

Choice of Drugs:
OTC prescribing 10,11 TBa-2; RBa-8
Pain - types and drugs of choice 12,13 TBa-33; TBb-64; RBa-9
Anti-infectives 14,15 TBa-35-42; TBb-section 72-91; RBa-10
Parenteral nutrition 16,17 TBa-7; TBb-28-30; RBa-12

Monitoring:
Neonates, Paediatrics, Geriatrics 18-22 TBa-9-11; TBb-6,15-16
Clinical Pharmaco-kinetics self study - TBa-24, TBb-1
Drug interactions 23,24 TBa-4; TBb-3
Adverse Drug Reactions 25-27 TBa-5; TBb- 2; RBa-16
Laboratory data analysis 28,29 TBa-6; TBb-5; RBb-5; RBe-1
Prescription monitoring 30-32 TBa-2; RBa-13,17-20; RBb-8
Patient-case presentation 33-34 TBb-8; RBb-3,4,6

Therapeutics: —
Planning in various disorders 35 onwards TBb-12-58; TBb-9-103;
RBb-7; RBe-2-33
(selected topics will be discussed in class and others
covered through case studies, practicum experience)
Clinical Applications
of Radio-Pharmaceuticals self reading RBc-3,6,7,13-15; RBe-36

Learning objectives*

Policy: Background, ethics, methods of Phase |, Il, III clinical trials, design and analysis, economic
prescribing are discussed.

Choice of Drugs: The use of over-the-counter drugs, their management, detection of symptoms, use of antimicrobial drugs, parenteral nutrition and maintenance, - their drug induced alterations, etc. are
emphasized.

Monitoring: Significance of drug dose calculations in different age groups, assessment of physical functions,
drug-drug and drug-food interactions, patient case presentations, therapeutic drug monitoring
of potent drugs are covered. These topics will be covered through case studies and studies on
patient case presentations, prescription data analysis, following discussion of concepts in class,
separately through the practicum experience as discussed below.

Clinical Applications
of Radio-Pharmaceuticals :

Radio-active - tracers / chemicals / pharmaceuticals used as diagnostics and for treatment, their applications in
pharmacy.

Page 2of 4
BIRLA INSITTUTE OF TECHONOLOGY & SCIENCE, PILANI
Pilani Campus

 

The Assignment(s) / Practicum experience will be case study, survey based study or situation based
study on either some or all of the below mentioned topics mostly covering various aspects of
therapeutics. Students may have to collect material from various sources for the same. Details will
be intimated through a separate notification or in class.

Assignment(s)* / Practicum experience* ( Ref: TBa, TBb, RBb ): learning skills

Practice of Clinical Pharmacy and ethics Taking medication histories

Physical assessment skills Review of laboratory and diagnostic tests
IV drug administration and dosing calculations Patient case presentation

Therapeutic planning Monitoring drug therapies

Researching and providing drug information (DIS) Health care management

5. Evaluation :

COMPONENT WEIGHTAGE DURATION DATE & TIME REMARKS
1. Test — |/Mid.Sem.Test* 30 90 min. as in timetable CLOSED BOOK
3. Assignment(s)*/ 40 continuous ===
Practicum experience*
4. Compre. Exam.* 30 120 min. as in timetable partly CLOSED and /or
OPEN BOOK

MID.- SEM. grading will be done whenever about 30 40 % of the evaluation components are completed.

NOTE :

* Case studies, interpretation of data and their analysis, will form a part of all evaluation components.
Assignments(s) may include seminar presentation and viva.

* Continuous assessment may include quiz(zes) viva-voce, case studies and or analysis, home assignments,
clinical data intrepretations, etc.

* *Practicum experience and or Assignment(s) may be practical / theory oriented for which type-written
report in a standard format should be submitted as per deadline(s) that would be announced, therein. It
may also include a viva and or a seminar presentation. However all assignments/reports ( final, complied )
should be completed and submitted by last week of classwork. It is necessary that all students stick to time
schedule and DO NOT postpone submission of assignments/reports so as to prevent extra load during last
two weeks of class work. Study reports are to be submitted on immediate completion of analysis, as
instructed.

* It is strongly advised that all students prepare their own class notes and relevant information from text,
reference material, as in handout, would only be allowed for consultation during assessments of open
book/notes. Photocopies of any material, written or printed will not be permitted. Stapled sheets , loose
sheets of information written or printed, photocopies of slides used for discussion in class will not be
allowed.

Page Sof 4
 

*K

*

BIRLA INSITTUTE OF TECHONOLOGY & SCIENCE, PILANI
Pilani Campus

Slides, if any, used during class hours provide key information for which additional supportive information is
expected to be collected from sources aforementioned. These slides may not be shared and hence students
are requested/advised to make their own notes during class hour. Recent developments in the area/topic
will be discussed in class based on their significance to healthcare delivery and hence some information on
therapeutic benefits and toxicity effects, besides others, may differ from the information in text, reference
material and hence students are expected to take note of such key discussions during contact hours. Such
discussions held in class will be considered as primary source of information in assessments.

Quiz(zes) may/will be conducted as a part of evaluation component, at random, during contact hours including
lecture, tutorial hours, as convenient, with/without prior intimation and sometimes outside class contact hours
(for both theory and practicum experience) and hence it is expected that the students come prepared to every
class on topics covered in earlier contact hours. Students are also requested to refresh their knowledge in

anatomy, physiology and pharmacology.

 

For all evaluation components, information given during classroom instruction, aforementioned text books and
reference books in the same order, will be considered as correct. Students are advised to follow the text
reference material as given in hand-out. _ All evaluation components are equally important, irrespective of
weightage. Hence, students _ failing to attend scheduled classes, or absenting themselves in one or many of the
evaluation components, may become ineligible for obtaining a_ valid grade at the end of the semester.
Attendance in lectures, tutorials and practicum experience are all equally important as they are all integral
components of learning, irrespective of weightage and may be taken into consideration, during grading.

 

Hence, students are strongly advised to keep away from absenting themselves from all aforementioned
contact sessions. Clearing the course would require adequate performance in written quizzes, tests,
examinations, and in practicum experience components, separately (i.e. procuring low marks in evaluation
components, aforementioned, other than practicum experience, would not suffice, to clear the course).

* Any other adaptive changes in the handout, will be announced in class, if any.

6. Reading Assignments :
Students are advised to read, collect additional information on the above mentioned topics as per given
schedule. Revision of basic principles of anatomy, physiology and pharmacology including medicinal
chemistry is necessary for case study related analysis and intrepretation.

7. Chamber consultation hours : (3170-S ); 01596-515207; To be announced in class.

8. Notices : Notices concerning the course will be displayed on the Pha. Group N.B. only.

9. Make-Ups :

Make-Ups are not given as a routine. It is solely dependant upon the GENUINENESS OF THE
CIRCUMSTANCES under which a student fails to appear in a scheduled evaluation component. In such
circumstances, prior permission should be obtained from the Instructor-in-Charge. IN NO CASE THE
MAKE-UP APPLICATION BE SLIPPED INSIDE THE CHAMBER OF THE INSTRUCTOR-IN-CHARGE. The decision
of the Instructor-in-Charge in the above matter will be final.

Instructor - in -Charge
PHA G614

Page 4of 4
