BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

 

SECOND SEMESTER 2020-21
COURSE HANDOUT
Date: 17.01.2021
In addition to part I (General Handout for all courses appended to the Time table) this portion gives further

specific details regarding the course.

Course No : PHA F422
Course Title : Cosmetic Science
Instructor-in-C harge : Dr. Murali Monohar Pandey

Tutorial/Practical Instructors:

1. Course Description:

Principles of formulation of typical cosmetic preparations such as cosmetic creams, powders, lipsticks, rouges,
hair preparations, dentrifices, aerosol cosmetics, perfumes for cosmetic, their blending and mixing techniques.

Some recent and new trends.

2. Scope and Objective of the C ourse:

This course will provide an introduction to the various cosmetics intended for beautification and hygiene, their
formulation and evaluation of their quality. The laboratory sessions include involves some fundamental
exercises in the evolution of formulae of products such as creams, lipsticks, hair care products, nail lacquers,

dental care preparations etc.

3. Text Books:
1. Mithal B.M., Saha R.N., A Handbook of Cosmetics, 1st Ed., Vallabh Prakashan, Delhi, 2006
4, Reference Books:

1. Harrys Cosmeticology. Chemical publishing company

2. Balsam and Sagarin, Cosmetics: Science and Technology, Wiley- Interscience
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

5. Course Plan:

1. Cosmetics—an | L1: Introduction to cosmetics TB1- Chapter | Orientation to cosmetic
introduction 1 andclass | science
notes

2. Cosmetics for | L2-L9: Structure of skin, Formulation | TB1- Chapter | Knowledge of cosmetic
skin and evaluation of various cosmetic | 2-6 andclass | products intended to be

products intended for skin including notes used on skin

skin creams and sunscreen

preparations.

L10-L18: Structure of _ hair, | TB1- Chapters | Exposure to various
3. Cosmetics for Formulation and evaluation of various | 7,8,10,13,14 | types of products applied
hair hair cosmetic products including on hairs

shampoos, conditioners, hair colorants,

hair removers and shaving

preparations.
4.Cosmeticsfor |L19-L21: Structure’ of nails, | TB1- Chapters | Understanding of
nails Formulation and _ evaluation of cosmetic products

cosmetic products for nails such as nail needed to be applied on

lacquers and nail lacquer removers. nails

5. Cosmetics for L22-L27: Formulation and evaluation | TB1- Chapters | Application of cosmetics
hygiene of dental care products, soaps, 19,20 and _ | inhygiene
perfumes and deodorants. Class notes

6. Use of L28-L30: Role of surfactants and Class notes | Exposure of various
Surfactants and other additives in cosmetics excipients used in
other ingredients cosmetic products

in cosmetics

7. New L31-L35:Nanotechnology in cosmetics | Classnotes | Update to the current
developments in Herbal cosmetics Regulatory status of cosmetic

cosmetic science | Developments science

 

6. Evaluation Scheme:

Component Duration | Weightage Date & Time Nature of component
(% ) (Close Book/ O pen Book)

Mid-Semester Test Closed Book

Continues assessment To be announced in the Closed Book/O pen Book
(Quizzes /assignments class
/presentation)

Components
Examination

 
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

7. Chamber Consultation Hour: To be announced in the class

8. Notices: Notice Board of the Pharmacy Department.

9, Make-up Policy: Make-ups are not given as a routine. It is solely dependent on the “genuineness” of the
circumstances under which a student fails to appear in a scheduled evaluation component. Prior permission
should be sought from the instructor-in-charge in advance.

10. Any further detail (if required) will be announced in class.

10. Note (if any): 
Instructor-in-charge
PHA F422
