BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

SECOND SEMESTER 2018-19
COURSE HANDOUT
Date: 10/03/2021

In addition to part I (General Handout for all courses appended to the Time table) this portion gives further
specific details regarding the course.

Course No : PHA G632

Course Title : Dosage Form Design

Instructor-in-C harge : Dr Anil Jindal

Instructor(s) 
Practical Instructors: Mr. Rupesh, Mr. Atharva Rajendra Bhide, Mr. Rajesh Pradhan

1. Course Description: A study of physical and chemical, pharmacological and biopharmaceutic factors
involved in the design and stability of dosage forms; transport of drugs across biological membranes;
absorption, distribution and elimination of drugs; formulation additives, closures and containers and
sustained release dosage forms; microencapsulation; radio pharmaceuticals.

2. Scope and Objective of the Course: It is a course intended to give the students an idea of various
aspects of designing of different dosage forms particularly for new drugs, and factors to be considered for
such designs, studies of effects of different additives used for designing different dosage forms. This
course also deals with different controlled release delivery systems, aerosols, and various newer and
novel modern drug delivery systems, packaging materials.

3. Text Books:
1. G.S. Banker and C.T. Rhodes, Modern Pharmaceutics, 4" Ed., Marcel Dekker Inc. New Y ork;

4, Reference Books:

B.M. Mithal, A Text Book of Pharmaceutical Formulations, 6" ed., 1997, Vallabh Prakash, Delhi.

Y .W. Chien, Novel Drug Delivery Systems, 2" ed. Marcel Dekker Inc., New Y ork.

P.B. Deasy, Microencapsulation and Related Drug Processes, Marcel Dekker Inc.,New Y ork.

J. Swarbrick, Current concepts in Pharmaceutical Sciences: Dosage Form Design, 1970 Lea & Fediger,
Philadelphia.

R.L. Juliano, Drug Delivery Systems, 1980, Oxford Univ. Press, New Y ork.

Prescott and Nimmo, Novel Drug Delivery, John Wiley & Sons, Chichesta.

B.T. Loftus and R.A. Nagh, Pharmaceutical Process Validation, Marcel Dekker Inc.,New Y ork.
Lachmann, Liebermann and Kanig, The Theory & Practice of Industrial Pharmacy, K.M. Vergesh,
3" Edition, 1990. New Delhi.

9. Remignton’s Pharmaceutical Sciences.

10. P. Tyle, Drug Delivery Devices: Fundamentals and Applications; Marcel Dekker Inc, New Y ork.

11. E.J. McNally, Protein Formulation and Delivery, Marcel Dekker Inc., New Y ork.

12. P.Tyle, Specialized Drug Delivery Systems, Marcel Dekker Inc., New Y ork.

13. Journal articles

5. Course Plan:

Module | Lecture Session Reference | Learning outcomes
No.
1

Introduction to Dosage Form Introduction to different dosage forms and
Design: Preformulation studies& |1&7 role of preformulation studies in dosage form
decision of Dosage Forms. design

1

fr OO DN

Se le

  
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

Role of drug properties and route Physicochemical properties of the drugs and
of administration in formulation biological factors for design and performance
development of dosage forms
To understand the process of drug absorption:
Principles of drug absorption T1-Ch 2 Drug absorption process, mechanisms
and 4 involved and factors affecting the absorption
of drug

Oral drug delivery and delivery Gastric anatomy and dynamics, design of
9-13 Ref 2
systems novel drug delivery systems for oral delivery

. Approaches for injectable drug delivery, case
14-17 Parenteral arug delivery and Ref 02 studies, biopharmaceutics, Implantable drug
delivery systems
delivery systems

18-20 Microencapsulation Ref 05 Fundamental considerations, methods and
application of microencapsulation of drugs

Skin permeation of drugs, technologies for
; ; design of transdermal drug delivery systems,
alae Transdenmial ang delivery systems advances in transdermal drug delivery
systems

nk vey syste 18 Barriers of drug permeation, Methods to
29-28 Ophthalmic drug delivery systems | 13 overcome barriers. Pharmacokinetics of
ophthalmic formulations
Factor affecting pulmonary delivery of drugs,
29-32 pharmacokinetic of pulmonary drug delivery,
formulation considerations
Parenteral delivery of protein and peptides,
33-36 Proteins and peptide drug delivery | 22 biomedical application, non-invasive routes
for protein and peptide drug delivery

37-40 Mucosal drug delivery systems Nasal, buccal and sublingual drug delivery

6. Evaluation Scheme:

Component Duration | Weightage Date & Time Nature of component
(% ) (Close Book/ Open
Book)

Mid-Semester Test <TEST 1> Close and/or book

7 ;
co

 

Examination

Project/Lab Continuous 35
components/

Seminar/assignment

a) Itis strongly advised that all students prepare their own class notes and relevant information from
text, reference material, as in handouts would only be allowed for consultation during assessments
of open book/notes. Photocopies of any material, written or printed will not be permitted. Stapled
sheets , loose sheets of information written or printed, photocopies of slides used for discussion in
class will not be allowed.

 
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

b) Slides used during class hours provide key information for which additional supportive information
is expected to be collected from sources aforementioned. These slides will not be shared and hence
students are requested/advised to make their own notes during class hour.

c) For all evaluation components, information given during classroom instruction, aforementioned text
books and reference books in the same order, will be considered as correct. Students are advised to
follow the text, reference material as given in hand-out.

d) All evaluation components are equally important, irrespective of weightage. Hence, students
failing to attend scheduled classes, or absenting themselves in one or many of the evaluation
components, may become ineligible for obtaining a valid grade at the end of the semester.
Attendance in lectures, tutorials and practicum experience are all equally important as they are all
integral components of learning, irrespective of weightage and may be taken into consideration,
during grading.

7. Chamber C onsultation Hour: To be announced in class

8. Notices: Notice, if any, conceming the course will be displayed on the notice Board
of Pharmacy Department Notice Board.

9, Make-up Policy: Make-Ups are not given as a routine. It is solely dependent upon the GENUINENESS
OF THE CIRCUMSTANCES under which a student fails to appear in a scheduled evaluation component. In
such circumstances, prior permission should be obtained from the Instructor-in-Charge. In no case the
make-up letter be slipped inside the chamber of the Instructor-In-Charge. The decision of the Instructor- inCharge will be final.

10. Note (if any): Nil

Instructor-in-charge
Course No. PHA G632
