BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

SECOND SEMESTER 2020-2021
COURSE HANDOUT
Date: 16.01.2021

In addition to part I (General Handout for all courses appended to the Time table) this portion gives further
specific details regarding the course.

Course No. : PHA F244

Course Title : Physical Pharmacy
Instructor-in-C harge : ANUPAMA MITTAL
Instructor(s) : None

Practical Instructors: Sudeep Phukale, Arihant K Singh, Moumita Basak, and Nikita Hinge

1. Course Description: The course describes the relevance of various physiological, physico-chemical and
biopharmaceutical properties of drug with respect to drug absorption, dosage form design, pre-formulation
studies and therapeutic efficacy. It also discusses the various underlying principles involved in designing of
particular dosage form.

2. Scope and Objective of the Course: This course deals with the applications of physiochemical principles
like solubility, pKa, crystal structure, polymorphism etc. to formulation and stability of the API in different
drug delivery systems. It also includes discussion on the surface properties, kinetics and rheology.

3. Text Books: Patrick J Sinko and Yashveer Singh. "Martin’s Physical Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical
Sciences". Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 6" Edition, 2009.

4, Reference Books:

(i) David B. Troy and Paul Beringer, " Remington: The Science and Practice of Pharmacy, Lippincott
Williams and Wilkins; 21 Edition, 2005.

(ii) Liberman, H and Lachmnan, L, Theory and Practice of Industrial Pharmacy". CBS; 4“ Edition, 2013.

(iii) Liberman, H and Lachman, L, "Pharmaceutical dosage forms": Tablets V ol.2, Marcel Dekker, New Y ork,
1980.

(iv) Liberman, H and Lachman, L, "Pharmaceutical dosage forms": Disperse systems Vol.1, Marcel
Dekker, New Y ork, 1987.

5. Course Plan:

No./T opics Chap/Sec
Physical Pharmacy | Introduction and A pplication. properties in dosage form designing

Preformulation studies, Understanding of each of the
2-6. Polymorphs, Molecular optimization, pKa mentioned properties in depth, their
solubility, pH, determination, Crystallinity and | Ref (ii) determination and their role in

pKa, Log P etc. polymorphism, hygroscopicity, designing the dosage form fora
partition coefficient. particular A PI.

Powder characterization Measurement of particle size and size
7-10. Micrometrics | (Particle size, measurement & | 2(a) ch 16 distribution, significance of density,
analysis), Types of powder porosity and flow of powders in

1

 
 

11-15. Rheology Introduction

16-18.
Determination of
Surface tension

19-21. Adsorption
at interfaces

21-24 Diffusion &
Dissolution

25-28 Kinetics

29. Stability testing

30-32 Colloids

33-34. Suspensions

35. Emulsions

densities and quantitative
estimation, flow properties of
powders.

Concept of viscosity,
Newtonian and NonNewtonian systems,
Thixotropy, Rheopexy,
Temperature dependence of
viscosity, single-point and
multi-point viscometers and
viscoelasticity, application of
viscosity in delivery systems.

Surface and interfacial tension,
surface energy, determination
of surface tension

Adsorption isotherms, types of
adsorption, surface-active
agents and classification,
Hydrophilic-hydrophobic
balance (HLB), Electrical
properties at interface.

Principles of diffusion &
dissolution, different
dissolution apparatuses,
Mathematical models &
applications to drug release

Order of reactions & its
determination & factors
affecting the order of reaction

Different types of stability
testing and recommended
conditions for stable
formulations

Types and applications of
colloids in pharmacy &
molecular weight determination
Evaluation of physical stability,
electrical properties and
formulation of suspensions
Types, properties, evaluation of
stability and formulation of
emulsions.

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

dosage form designing and
packaging.

Significance of rheological behavior
in dosage form designing,
measurement of viscosity for both
Newtonian and Non-Newtonian
systems. Selection of appropriate
viscometer for a given fluid.

Significance of surface tension in
dosage form designing and
knowledge of various methods for
determining surface tension

Applications of adsorption at
solid/liquid interfaces in pharmacy,
how to reduce surface tension if
required and selection of proper
surfactant for a given application.

Significance of diffusion &
dissolution in release of drug from
the dosage form, selection of
dissolution apparatus depending upon
the type of dosage form, modeling of
release kinetics.

Projecting shelf life of an API and
how to control factors responsible for
degradation of formulations during
storage.

Significance of different types of
Stability testing in dosage form.

Properties of colloids and their
importance and their applications in
pharmacy

Application of the above discussed
physicochemical properties in
formulation of suspensions.
Application of the above discussed
physicochemical properties in
formulation of emulsions.

 
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

36-38. Classification of complexes (a) ch 11 Applications of complexes in dosage
Complexation and method of analysis form designing

6. Evaluation Scheme:

0

Multiple Quizzes will
Assignment/Surprise , be conducted and
Quiz #Seminar Is During the lecture hours average will be taken
for final total

 

 

Comprehensive Exam 12/05/19 CB/OB or both

Laboratory attendance
Tuesday (H1-2)/ .
Laboratory component 2h/week 29 is must and no makeThursday (H10-11) . ;
up will be given

‘Students are strongly advised to prepare their own notes based on class lectures and relevant information from textbook
and reference material, as only these notes would only be allowed for consultation during assessments of open book
evaluation components. Photocopies of any material, written or printed will not be permitted. Stapled sheets , loose
sheets of information written or printed will not be allowed.

 

*Slides used during class hours provide key information for which additional supportive information is expected to be
collected from sources aforementioned. Recent developments in the area/topic will be discussed in class based on their
significance to healthcare delivery and hence some information on therapeutic benefits and toxicity effects, besides
others, may differ from the information in text, reference material and hence students are expected to take note of such
key discussions during contact hours. Such discussions held in class will be considered as primary source of information
in assessments.

* Quiz(zes) may/will be conducted as a part of evaluation component, at random, during contact hours including lecture,
tutorial hours, as convenient, with/without prior intimation and sometimes outside class contact hours ( for both theory
and practical) and hence it is expected that the students come prepared to every class on topics covered in earlier contact
hours. Regular classes will be held in designated tutorial hour to maintain continuity.

7, Mid-Sem. Grading would be done once at least 30-40 % evaluation components are completed.

8. All evaluation components are equally important, irrespective of weightage. Hence, students failing to
attend scheduled classes, or absenting themselves in one or many of the evaluation components, may
become ineligible for obtaining a_ valid grade at the end of the semester. Attendance in lectures, tutorials
and practicals are all equally important as they are all integral components of learning, irrespective of
weightage and may be taken into consideration, during grading.

Hence, students are strongly advised to keep away from absenting themselves from all
aforementioned contact sessions. Clearing the course would require adequate performance in
written quizzes**, tests**, examinations**, and in practical (laboratory) components, separately (
i.e. procuring low marks in evaluation components, aforementioned**, other than laboratory
practicals, would not suffice, to clear the course).

3
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus

AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

 

9, Any other adaptive changes in the handout, will be announced in class, if any.

10. Reading Assignments: Students are advised to read, collect additional information on the above
mentioned topics as per given schedule.

11. Chamber consultation hours: Wednesday 03:00-04:00 pm.
12. Notices: Notices concerning the course will be displayed on NALANDA only.

13. Make-Ups: Make-Ups are not given as a routine. It is solely dependent upon the GENUINENESS OF
THE CIRCUMSTANCES under which a student fails to appear in a scheduled evaluation component. In
such circumstances, prior permission should be obtained from the Instructor-in-Charge. In no case the

make-up letter be slipped inside the chamber of the Instructor-In-Charge. The decision of the Instructorin-Charge will be final.

Instructor-in-charge
PHA F244
