BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

SECOND SEMESTER 2019-20
COURSE HANDOUT (Part II)
Date: 07.01.2021

In addition to part | (General Handout for all courses appended to the Time table) this portion gives further specific
details regarding the course.

Course No. : PHA F215
Course Title : Introduction to Molecular Biology
Instructor-in-Charge : Dr. Aniruddha Roy

1. Scope and Objective of the Course:
This course deals with basic aspects of cell and molecular biology, DNA replication, transcription, translation and

control mechanisms of protein synthesis. Post transcriptional modifications, DNA-protein interactions and
regulation of gene expression. Basic aspects of immune system, cell-mediated and humoral immunity.
2. Text Book :
1. G.M. Cooper and R.E. Hausman, The Cell: A Molecular approach, ASM Press, Washington, D.C.4"" Edition.
2007.
2. Kuby Immunology by Owen et al., 7th Ed. Freeman press. 2013.
3. Reference Books :

1. H.Lodish et al., Molecular Cell Biology, 7‘ Ed., MacMillan, 2013.
2. B. Albert et al., Molecular Biology of the cell, 5" edition, Taylor & Francis Group, 2008.
3. Janeway's Immunobiology, Eighth Edition.

4. Course Plan

Topic to be Covered Learning Objectives

1-2 Introduction to Molecular biology of a cell and its applications. Brief outline | TB1, Ch1,2
( [Moeeuarboog —[otmoucuarcemisty en  eomme | TRGNE

RNA and protein synthesis, RNA polymerases, transcription,
regulation of protein function
12-15 Protein structure and Structure of proteins, Protein folding, Regulating protein
1245 | Protein structure and function, Purification and characterization of proteins.

16-20 Molecular Biology DNA cloning, Plasmid vectors, cDNA library, PCR and RT-PCR, | Class note
Techniques Screening of cDNA library, DNA sequencing, Microarray,
Different hybridization techniques, Knock out and knock
down of gene.

21-23 Cell signaling Signaling at cell surface, Cell surface receptors, Intracellular RB1 Ch13-14
signal transduction, Second messenger, Cell signaling to
control gene activity, TGFB, JAK-STAT, Tyrosine kinase and
MAP kinase pathway.

24-26 Cell cycle and cell Regulation of cell cycle, Cell birth, Lineage and Death, Cancer. | TB1, Ch3, 11, 12,
growth control 14,16

 
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

EEE
27-28 Immune system Cells, organs and tissues of immunity, receptors and TB2, Ch1-3
signaling, antigen, antibody, immunoglobulin genes
- Innate immunity, MHC | Infection barriers, phagocytosis, inflammation and adaptive TB2, Ch5, 8

and antigen immune responses, Role of MHC and expression patterns,
presentation antigen processing and presentation

34-37 Cell-based Immunity T-cell and B-cell activation, differentiation, memory, effector | TB2, Ch11-13
responses
38-40 Immune disorders Immunodeficiency diseases, autoimmune diseases, allergy TB2, Ch15-16
and hypersensitivity reactions, etc.
5. Evaluation:

Component Weightage Date & Time Nature of component
a (Close Book! eS Book)

Mid-Semester Test | <TEST_I> 1>

 

 

Comprehensive 3h re — + OB
Examination
z :

umes a0 urngsemester |
Assessment

 

*Continuous assessment will be based on theory covered in class. Topics and number will be announced in the class.
It will be in terms of home assignments, tutorials, and surprise tests.

6. Grading Procedure: Grading would be done by the bunching procedure. In borderline cases subjective judgment
will be used to award the grades. It is not mandatory to award all the eight grades (i.e. from A to E). Subjective
judgment based on attendance for the lectures, tutorials, appearance in quiz, student’s involvement in the course
and performance in the class would be used in the award of grades. The student shall not be considered as
"exposed" to the course, unless he/she demonstrates appreciable skill in both the class and theory components of
the course and through classroom participation. Attending tutorial and appearing surprise quiz is very important.
Students not appeared in any quiz or not submitted assignments, not appeared in any test/ comprehensive exam will
not be considered exposed to the course. It is also expected that student will attend classes regularly to get proper
exposure and to provide chance of evaluation of his knowledge.

7. Chamber consultation hours: To be announced in class.

8. Notices: Notices concerning the course will be displayed on the Pharmacy Notice Board.

9. Make-Ups: Make-Ups are not given as a routine. It is solely dependent upon the GENUINENESS OF THE
CIRCUMSTANCES under which a student fails to appear in a scheduled evaluation component. In such
circumstances, prior permission should be obtained from the Instructor-in-Charge.

Instructor-in -Charge

PHA F215
