BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

SECOND SEMESTER 2018-19
COURSE HANDOUT
Date: 07.01.2021

In addition to part I (General Handout for all courses appended to the Time table) this portion gives further
specific details regarding the course.

Course No : PHA F213

Course Title : Microbiology
Instructor-in-C harge : Dr. Aniruddha Roy
Instructor(s) :

Tutorial/Practical Instructors:

1. Course Description: This course will provide an introduction to the study of microorganisms, their
classification, structure and physiology, genetics, factors affecting growth, techniques of cultivation and
isolation, mechanisms for their control, interactions with humans, their role in disease and immunity and
tests for sterility and antimicrobial inhibition.

Laboratory sessions include basic techniques for culturing and identifying microorganisms, observing the
effect of various factors on their growth, sterilization techniques, evaluation of disinfectants and
antimicrobial screening.

2. Scope and Objective of the C ourse:
At the end of the course, the student will
VY Be familiar with microbial diversity

v Characterize bacteria and viruses

Vv Have an understanding of microbial growth, factors affecting growth, techniques for isolation and
cultivation of microorganisms.

v Have an understanding of physical and chemical methods for controlling or preventing bacterial
growth.

Y Describe the bacterial mechanisms of gene exchange.

v Have an understanding of physical and chemical methods for controlling or preventing bacterial
growth.

v Discuss mechanisms of microbial pathogenicity and host resistance to microbes.

Vv Able to use appropriate aseptic techniques, microscopy, and biochemical testing to identify unknown
bacteria.

3. Text Books:
Microbiology: An Introduction [Ninth edition] by Tortora, Funke and Case, 2006,
Publishers: PEARSON Benjamin Cummings.

4, Reference Books:
1. Pharmaceutical Microbiology, Hugo & Russel, Blackwell Publishing, 6"/ 7" Ed. 2005.
2. Tutorial Pharmacy, Cooper & Gunn’s 6" Edition, CBS Publishers, 2000.
3. Microbiology a Laboratory Manual: J.G. Cappuccino & N.Sherman,1983,
Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, Reading Massachuttes.

1
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

5. Course Plan:

Objectives Chapter # (Books)
microorganismes. Staining techniques. microbiology
eukaryotic cells

-6
Media requirements, culture media, growth 6 (TB)
7-9 curve, preserving bacterial culture, obtaining | Microbial growth
pure culture etc.
01 ™
viruses, bacteriophages & animal viruses
14-15 The way microorganisms die, physical Sterilization 7 (TB)
controls on microorganisms techniques
Chemical controls on Microorganisms, Antiseptics , 7 (
16-18 examples of chemicals, mechanism of action | disinfectants and

and their evaluation preservatives

exchange among microorganisms
body’s interior
immune system etc. with various systems
)

Medicinally important microorganisms , 3-6 (RB 1

Targets of antimicrobial drugs, Classification | Antimicrobial drugs &
with structures, mechanism of action etc. 20 (TB)

microbiology
Sterility testing, pyrogen testing, 23 (RB 1) & Class
38-40 Evaluation/screening of antimicrobial drugs | Miscellaneous notes
(in-vitro and in vivo)

 

b) Lab Components: [ List of experiments to be done]

Expt. No. 01. Introduction and applications of microbiology

Expt. No. 02. Preparation and sterilization of culture media.

Expt. No. 03. Isolating Pure Culture from mixed culture by Streak-Plate Method

Expt. No. 04. Isolating Pure Culture from mixed culture by Pour-Plate Method

Expt. No. 05. Isolating Pure Culture from mixed culture by Spread-Plate Method

Expt. No. 06. Factors influencing growth of micro-organisms: Effect of ultra temperature and pH of media on growth of
bacteria

Expt. No. 07. Factors influencing growth of micro-organisms: Effect of ultraviolet light and osmotic pressure on
bacterial growth.

Expt. No. 08. To perform differential staining for given bacterial culture by Gram staining technique.

Expt. No. 09. To perform differential staining for given bacterial culture by Acid Fast staining technique.

Expt. No. 10. Determination of bacterial motility using hanging drop method

Expt. No. 11. To determine antimicrobial activity of given antibacterial agents (antibiotics) by zone of inhibition
technique.
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

 

6. Evaluation Scheme:

Component Duration | Weightage Date & Time Nature of component
— 0 (Close Bool’ _——— Book)

Mid-Semester Test | <TEST1>

Comprehensive 3h —— <T $e > 44 — + CB
er

Sere wa [| aie |e
Lab components® Lab hours

 

* Surprise tests will be conducted during class/tutorials on the basis of topics covered in class
* Weightage of lab components : Day to day Work - 5%; Viva (continious) - 2.5%; Lab compre Quiz - 5%; Viva
(Compre) - 2.5%

7. Chamber C onsultation Hour: To be announced in the class.

8. Notices: Notices conceming the course will be displayed on the Notice Board of the
Pharmacy Department.

9, Make-up policy: Generally make-up will be considered for regular students only (80% attendance IN
LECTURE CLASSES). Prior approval or intimation to take a make-up is a must. It is solely the discretion
of the instructor-in-charge, depending upon the genuineness of the circumstances, to allow a student to
appear for a make-up evaluation component.

Instructor-in-charge
Course No. PHA F213
