BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

SECOND SEMESTER 2020-21
COURSE HANDOUT
Date: 18.01.2021

In addition to part I (General Handout for all courses appended to the Time table) this portion gives further
specific details regarding the course.

Course No : PHA F344
Course Title : Natural Drugs
Instructor-in-C harge : Dr. Atish T. Paul
Instructor(s) : NA

Tutorial/Practical Instructors: Pracheta Sengupta, Nisha Y adav, K. Sriravali, Reena

1. Course Description: This course is a laboratory oriented course and covers application of natural drugs
for drug discovery and development

2. Scope and Objective of the Course: This course deals with study of crude drugs of natural origin,
currently used in pharmacy and medicine. The study comprises of classification of crude drugs, principles
of cultivation, collection, preparation for market and commerce of natural drugs, their morphological,
microscopical and chemical characteristics, identification, uses and common adulterants.

3. Text Books: Trease and Evans Pharmacognosy, W.B. Saunders (Harcourt Publishers Ltd), 16M gq, 2009.

4, Reference Books:
1. Tyler V.E, Brady, L.R, Robbers, J.E, Pharmacognosy, Lea & Febiger, gtheg, 2003.
2. Wallis T.E, Text book of Pharmacognosy, CBS Publishers, 5 "ed. 1997.
 

5. Course Plan:

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani

Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Antiviral agents activities of natural
products

 

 

 

Module _ Lecture session/Tutorial Session Reference Learning Outcome
Number

I Origin of pharmacognosy TB-1(1) | Student will understand
Scope of pharmacognosy basics of Introduction to
Practice of pharmacognosy Natural Drugs &
Plant nomenclature and taxonomy nomenclature

II Techniques in microscopy TB-1(9), | Student will understand
Plantdescription RB-2 | basics of Microcopy,

Macroscopical stud of

an tmorphology & Plant Tissues and contents
micromorphology
Ergastic cell contents

IT] Basic metabolic pathways TB-1(5) | Student will leam _ the
Origin of secondary metabolites concept of Phytochemistry,
Biological and geographical sources How natural products are
of drugs biosynthesized
General methods associated with the
phytochemical investigation

IV Study on Alkaloids TB-1(6) | Student will leam the
Study on Terpenes Pharmacopoeial and related
Study on Saponins and Steroids drugs of biological origin
Study on Phenols and phenolic
glycosides
Study on Cyanogenetic glycosides
Study of Miscellaneous class of
compounds

V Anticancer activities of natural TB-1(2) | Student will learn the Plant
products and animal kingdoms as
An overview of drugs with sources of drugs
antihepatotoxic activities
An overview of drugs with oral
hypoglycaemic activities
Nutraceuticals
Antibacterial activities of natural
products
Antiprotozoal activities of natural
products

 

 
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

VI Traditional plant medicines as a TB-1(7) | Student will learn about the
source of new drugs Research | Plants used in
Herbal medicine in Britain and articles | complementary and
Europe: regulation and practice traditional © systems of
Homoeopathic medicine and medicine
aromatherapy
Aspects of Asian medicine and its
practice in the West
Herbs and Plants in Chinese and
African traditional medicine
VII Commerce in crude drugs TB-1(3) | Student will learn about the
Production of crude drugs Research | Commercial production,
Plant growth regulators articles | quality and standardization of
Plant cell and tissue culture natural products
Phytochemical variation within a
species
Quality control of herbal medicines
VII Hallucinogenic plants TB- Student will learn about the
Allergenic plants 1(8), | non-medicinal toxic plants
; RB- and pesticides
Teratogenic and other toxic plants 1(15)
Pesticides of natural origin
IX Synergy and _ Biological target Research | Student will learn about the
interaction and identification with articles | recent advances in _ herbal
natural products etc. drugs discovery
6. Evaluation Scheme:
Component Duration | Weightage | Date& Nature of component
Mid-Semester Test* 90 min. 30 As per Close Book
ee ste
Open Book/Close Book

* Continuous assessment 30 (10420) Open Book/Close Book
(Laboratory and Quiz)

$It is strongly advised that all students prepare their own class notes and relevant information from text,
reference material, as in handouts would only be allowed for consultation during assessments of open
book/notes. Photocopies of any material, written or printed will not be permitted. Stapled sheets, loose
Sheets of information written or printed, photocopies of slides used for discussion in class will not be
allowed.
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

* Continuous assessment will be based on theory covered in class and practicals. Topics and number will be
announced in the class. It will be in terms of, tutorials, day to day laboratory experiments, laboratory
comprehensive exam and class participation. In case of tutorials, students are supposed to attend them
regularly. Surprise quiz will be a part of continuous assessment. In case of laboratory practical's students
are expected to write lab records properly in addition to what is taught, refer other books, draw proper
diagrams, and submit the lab records on time. Mere presence during practicals does not guarantee marks in
experiments.

Practicum experience:

No of practical hours | References/chapters

Practical’s based on morphological and | Asin timetable Different chapters of text

microscopical features of medicinal book/ practical book
plants, Extraction and Thin layer
chromatography

 

7. Mid-Sem. Grading: It would be done once at least 30-40 % evaluation components are completed.

8. Chamber C onsultation Hour: to be announced in class.

9. Notices: Notices conceming the course will be displayed on the Pharmacy Group N.B. only.

10. Make-up Policy: Make- Ups are not given as a routine. It is solely dependent upon the GENUINENESS
OF THE CIRCUMSTANCES under which a student fails to appear in a scheduled evaluation component. In
such circumstances, prior permission should be obtained from the Instructor-in-Charge. IN NO CASE THE
MAKE-UP APPLICATION BE SLIPPED INSIDE THE CHAMBER OF THE INSTRUCTOR-INCHARGE. However, the decision of the Instructor-in-Charge in the above matter will be final.

11. Note (if any): NA

Instructor-in-charge
Course No. PHA F344
