BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

SECOND SEMESTER 2020-21
COURSE HANDOUT
Date: 12.03.2021

In addition to part | (General Handout for all courses appended to the Time table) this portion gives further specific
details regarding the course.

Course No : PHA G545
Course Title : INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS AND PHARMACEUTICALS
Instructor-in-Charge : HEMANT R JADHAV

1. Course Description:

Key aspects of intellectual property law and their impact on Pharmaceutical industry; concept of property with
respect to intellectual creativity; emerging debates, policy issues and law reforms related to IPR with respect to
pharmaceuticals; Issues of Intellectual Property such as Patents, Copyright, Trademarks, and Design; rules and
regulations of marketing and competition; Patent processing, infringement of patents, ethics and economic issues
related to IPR.

2. Scope and Objective of the Course:

This course considers key aspects of intellectual property law. It covers Indian legal system & its role in IPR. The
course describes concept of property with respect to intellectual creativity. Issues of Intellectual Property such as
Patents, Copyright, Trademarks, and Design will be discussed. Patent procedures, infringement of patents, ethics and
economic issues related to IPR will be discussed. The overall objective of this course is to equip students and
stakeholders with knowledge of Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) related protection systems, their significance and
use of IPR as a tool for wealth and value creation in a knowledge-based economy.

3. Text Book: Cornish, William R., ‘Intellectual Property: Patents, Copyrights, TM & Allied Rights’, Sweet & Maxwell
Ltd., 8° Ed. 2013.
4. Reference Books/material:
1. Feroz Ali Khader, ‘The Law Of Patents-With A Special Focus On Pharmaceuticals In India’, Lexis Nexis, 3" Ed,
2011
2. Besides the above, relevant information on the topics are also available online at
e www.ipindia.nic.in
e www.uppto.gov.in

5. Course Plan:

Module | Lecture Session Reference | Learning outcomes
nn eewesemion | Berens | Ieeningoutomes
Evolution of IP system, Introduction of novelty and non- | TB Ch 2; RB Concept of IPRs
obviousness principles, Importance of IPRs, Ch1
Development of IPRs in India

Copyrights: subject matter, rights associated, procedure | TB Ch 10-14; | Understanding Law of
for acquiring rights, remedies and infringement issues RB 2 Copyright

Miscellaneous IPRs like Industrial Designs, Geographical | TB Ch15, 20, | Understanding
Indications, Trade Secretes, Protection against Unfair 21; RB 2 miscellaneous IPRs
competition

3 Trademarks: subject matter, rights associated, TB Ch 16-17; | Understanding Law of
procedure for acquiring rights, remedies and RB 2 trademark
infringement issues

 
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

Ol |
Indian patent system, application procedure, forms, RB Ch 9-10 Understanding Indian
f° [Sfectntonsandprortydates ee
7 American patent system, specifications, Hatch Waxman _| TB Ch4, 7 Understanding American
7 [gaan rrertontem pecntons teh Wemen Tl paentaw
Compulsory licensing, legal issues related to Patents, TB Ch 7; RB Fields of exploration
Doctrine of Equivalents
International treaties and conventions on IPRs with Class notes Knowing various
special emphasis on Patent Cooperation Treaty (salient oe international treaties
features of the PCT, filing etc) related to IPRs
Patent office procedures, examination of patent RB Ch 6, 7; Patent drafting methods

applications, basics of drafting patent, types of Claims, class notes
Constructing Claims, Infringement issues in Patent

Drafting

| love Boot Open Book)
(%) (Close Book/ Open Book)
me Seeaoreren
book
120 Min. Closed book and/or open
book
a

| po

*Continuous assessment will be based on theory covered and will be in terms of home assignments, quizzes,
projects, viva-voce, presentations, etc. Exact topics and number will be announced in class.

** It is strongly advised that all students prepare their own notes and relevant information from lectures, text and
reference books as given in handouts. Only notes and books (given in hand out) will be allowed for consultation
during open book assessments. Photocopies of any material, written or printed will not be permitted due to
copyright issues.

*** Recent developments in the area/topic will be discussed in class and hence some information may differ from
the information in text or reference material. Such discussions held in class will be considered as primary source of
information in assessments and hence students are expected to take note.

 

7. Chamber Consultation Hour: Room No. 3170 X, Time to be announced in class.

8. Notices: Notices concerning the course will be displayed on the Pharmacy Group Notice Board only.

9. Make-up Policy: Generally make-up will be considered for regular students only. It is solely dependent on the
‘genuineness’ of the circumstances. The make-up application should be personally given to instructor-in-charge.

10. Note (if any): Students are advised to read, collect additional information on the above mentioned topics. All
evaluation components are equally important, irrespective of weightage. Hence, students failing to attend scheduled
classes, or absenting themselves in one or many of the evaluation components, may become ineligible for obtaining
a valid grade at the end of the semester. Attendance in all lectures and assessments are equally important as they
are all integral components of learning, irrespective of weightage and may be taken into consideration during
grading.

Instructor-in-Charge
Course No. PHA G545
