BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

SECOND SEMESTER 2020-2021
Course Handout

Date: 16/01/2021

Course No. : PHA F341

Course Title : Pharmacology-ll

Instructor-In-Charge : Gaikwad Anil Bhanudas

Team of Instructors : Sankrityayan Himanshu, Deepak Kumar Sahel, Ajinath Vishwanath Kale,

Shelke Vishwadeep Madhukar

Course Description:
Pharmacology of important classes of drugs including their mechanisms of action, therapeutic uses, side effects, toxic
manifestations, indications and contraindications.

Scope and Objectives:

This course is intended to impart the knowledge regarding the concepts of actions of drugs on various systems of the
human body including cardiovascular system, urinogenital system, respiratory system, gastrointestinal and endocrine
system etc. The course also imparts the knowledge regarding the mechanisms of action of various antimicrobial agents
in the treatment and prevention of various diseases caused by the bacteria, fungi viruses and parasites. The course
also deals with the drug-drug interactions, therapeutic uses, side effects and contraindications of the drugs, which are
commonly prescribed for the treatment of various disease conditions.

Text book:
1. Satoskar R.S. & Bhandarkar S.D., Pharmacology and Pharmacotherapeutics. Revised 22nd edition, Popular
Prakashan, Bombay, 2011.

Reference Books:

1. Tripathi KD, Essentials of Medical Pharmacology, 6th edition, Jaypee brothers, New Delhi, 2006.

2. Lippincott’s Illustrated reviews: Pharmacology, MJ Mycek et al (Editor), Lippincott-Raven Publishers, New York,
3rd edition, 2001.

3. Katzung BG, Basic and Clinical Pharmacology, 8th edition, Prentice Hall, London, 2001
Goodman & Gilman's The Pharmacological Basis of Therapeutics, by JG Hardman (Editor), 10th edition,
McGraw-Hill Publishing Co, 2001.

5. Pharmacology, HP Rang, MM Dale & JM Ritter (editors), 6th edition, Churchill Livingstone, 2007.

COURSE PLAN:
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

|Module _—|tectureSession | Reference _| Learning Objective

TB: Section VIl_ | To understand the
production of Ang Il and its
action through the receptors.
To learn the drug mode of

   
   
  
 
  
   
  
  

Antihypertensive drugs

Antianginal drugs
Cardiovascular action, side effect and
Drugs Antiarrythmic agents indication which are used for
Cardiac Glycosides and drugs for treating the cardiovascular
heart failure and blood disorders.
Hypolipidaemic drugs
TB: Section IX

 
  

Kidney Antidiuretics

Coagulants and anticoagulants TB: Section VII
Drugs Affecting

Blood and Blood | Fibrinolytics and Antifibrinolytics

Formation
Antiplatelet /antithrombotic drugs

Drugs Acting on
Respiratory
System

TB: Section VI To learn the drug mode of
action, side effect and

Drugs for cough and bronchial indication which are used for

asthma

treating the Cough and
Brochial Asthma.

Drugs for peptic ulcer TB: Section X To learn the drug mode of
action, side effect and
indication which are used for
treating the GIT disorders.
Concepts of chemotherapy, TB: Section XII | To learn the drug mode of
classification of chemotherapeutic action, side effect and

drugs and general consideration indication which are used as
chemotherapy

Gastrointestinal
drugs

Antiemetic drugs

 

Sulphonamides and Cotrimoxazole

Quinolones and fluoroquinolones
Beta -Lactam Antibiotics

Tetracyclines and Chloramphenicol
Antimicrobial

Drugs Aminoglycoside antibiotics

Macrolide antibiotics
Antitubercular drugs
Antileprotic drugs
Antifungal drugs

Antiviral drugs

Antimalarial drugs

Hormones and Thyroid hormones and thyroid TB: Section XIlIl_ | To learn the drug mode of
Related Drugs inhibitors action, side effect and
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

Corticosteroids indication which are used for

endocrine disorders.
Insulin, Oral Hypoglycaemic drugs
and glucagon
Evaluation Scheme:
Evaluation Component Weight-age (%) | Date & Time Nature
——e

pt Mid semester Exam

 

2 [ein tnemn | f3p fen

 

Y *Continuous assessment may include quiz (zes), Laboratory - Day to Day work and quiz(zes), Viva-Voce, Home
assignment, and Lab. component including Lab. Compre., etc.

Vv It is strongly advised that all students prepare their own class notes and relevant information from text,
reference material, as in handouts would only be allowed for consultation during assessments of open
book/notes. Photocopies of any material, written or printed will not be permitted. Stapled sheets, loose
sheets of information written or printed, photocopies of slides used for discussion in class will not be
allowed.

Y Slides used during class hours provide key information for which additional supportive information is expected
to be collected from sources aforementioned.

Y Quiz (zes) may/will be conducted as a part of evaluation component, at random, during contact hours including
lecture, tutorial hours, as convenient, with/without prior intimation and hence it is expected that the students
come prepared to every class on topics covered in earlier contact hours. Regular classes will be held in
designated tutorial hour to maintain continuity.

v¥ Mid-Sem. Grading would be done once at least 30-40 % evaluation components are completed.

Y For all evaluation components, information given during classroom instruction, aforementioned text books
and reference books in the same order, will be considered as correct. Students are advised to follow the
text, reference material as given in hand-out. All evaluation components are equally important,
irrespective of weightage. Hence, students failing to attend scheduled classes, or absenting themselves in
one or many of the evaluation components, may become ineligible for obtaining a valid grade at the end of
the semester. Attendance in lectures and tutorials are all equally important as they are all integral
components of learning, irrespective of weightage and may be taken into consideration, during grading.

Y Any other adaptive changes in the handout, will be announced in class, if any.

Chamber Consultation Hour: To be announced in the class.

Make-up policy: Make-Ups are not given as a routine. It is solely dependent upon the GENUINENESS OF THE
CIRCUMSTANCES under which a student fails to appear in a scheduled evaluation component. In such circumstances,
prior permission should be obtained from the Instructor-in-Charge. In no case the make-up letter be slipped inside
the chamber of the Instructor-In-Charge. The decision of the Instructor- in-Charge will be final.

Notices: Concerning this course will be displayed on Pharmacy Department notice board only.

Instructor-in-Charge
PHA F341
