BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

SECOND SEMESTER 2020-21
COURSE HANDOUT
Date: 11.01.2021

In addition to part I (General Handout for all courses appended to the Time table) this portion gives
further specific details regarding the course.

Course No : PHA F212
Course Title : Dispensing Pharmacy
Instructor-in-C harge : Dr. Gautam Singhvi

T utorial/Practical Instructors:

1. Course Description: Prescriptions, principles involved in the dispensing of prescriptions;
physical, chemical and therapeutic incompatibilities involved and their remedy in such
prescriptions; techniques involved in dispensing of mixtures. ENT preparations, parenteral
products, radiopharmaceuticals, etc.

2. Scope and Objective of the Course: This course is concerned with the preparation and
dispensing of medicines. It intends to impart knowledge to the students on various aspects of
dispensing of medicaments with stress on compounding, stability, incompatibilities, packing
methods and labeling procedures. It also orients the students to take the responsibilities of a hospital
pharmacist.

3. Text Books:
1) Carter, S. J., Cooper and Gunn’s Dispensing for Pharmaceutical Students, Pitman Medical

Publishing Co. Ltd., 12" Ed, 1975.

4, Reference Books:
a) Merchant, S. H., Qadry, J. S., A Textbook of Hospital Pharmacy, B. S. Shah Prakashan,
2m Fd., 1994.

b) Remington’s Pharmaceutical Sciences, Mack Publishing Company, 17" Ed., 1985.

c) Different Pharmacoepias.
> Indian Pharmacoepia 1996.
> British Pharmacoepia 1999.
> United States Pharmacoepia 2006.
> Martindale: The Extra Pharmacoepia 1999.

3. Course Plan:
Lecture Lecture Title Reference* Learning outcome
1 Introduction T- Chapter 1 Definition and scope of dispensing
pharmacy. Historical background and
development of profession of pharmacy

 
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

2 Prescription T- Chapter 1 Components of prescriptions; Sources of
information

3-4 General dispensing T- Chapters 1,5 | Basics of proper dispensing; Fundamental
procedures operations in compounding including
weighing and measurements

5 Latin terms and T- Appendix 9 | Understanding commonly used
toons fein terminologies in a prescription

6 Modern methods of Class-notes Care to be taken and sources of error in a

7 Dosage form and T- Chapter 2 Type of dosage forms, Various types of

8-9 Labeling T-Chapter 4 and | Labeling requirements for dispensed
teeing et products according to regulatory guidelines

10 Dose and its calculations

11-12 Pharmaceutical T- Chapter 8 Understanding various types of calculations

13-14 Containers and closures T-Chapters 3 & | Various types of packaging containers/

21 and materials for dispensed products

Appendix 7

T-Chapter 7 and | Colour, flavour, antioxidants and

Appendix 1 preservatives employed in dispensed
productss

17-18 Solutions T-Chapter 9 Various types of solution preparations such
Setatons | Rapa as aromatic water, elixirs etc.

19-20 Suspensions T-Chapter 10 Formulation, evaluation and stability of

21-23 Emulsions and creams T-Chapter 11 Formulation, evaluation and stability of

24-25 Powders and oral unit T-Chapter 12 Formulation and evaluation of different
dosage forms types of powders; Critical parameters in
tablet and capsule manufacturing

26-28 Ointments, pastes and T-Chapter 13 Different types of ointment bases;
jellies Formulation and evaluation of ointments,
pastes and jellies

29 Suppositories and Pessaries | T-Chapter 14 Formulation and evaluation of
Suppositories and pessaries

30 Sterile dosage forms T-Chapter 20 Introduction to ophthalmic and parenteral
and 29; Class- preparations
notes

31-33 Incompatibilities T-Chapter 15 Physical, chemical and therapeutic
incompatibilities

34-35 Hospital pharmacy practice | Ref (a) Setting up a hospital pharmacy; Duties and
responsibilities of a hospital pharmacist
2

 

   

 
 
    
 

15-16 Additives

 

 
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

6. Evaluation Scheme:

Component Duration | Weightage | Date & Time | Nature of component
(% ) (Close Book/ Open
Book)
Book
90 minutes

Mid Term Test 90minutes | 25% | ~~ | Closed Book

Laboratory Component Continuous 20% To be Open Book
announced

Comprehensive Examination )180minutes | 35% Closed Book

 

7) Chamber C onsultation Hours: To be announced in class.
8) Notices: All the notices pertaining to this course will be displayed only on Pharmacy Notice board.

9) Make-up policy: Prior approval or intimation to take a make-up is a must. It is solely the discretion
of the instructor-in-charge, depending upon the genuineness of the circumstances, to allow a student

to appear for a make-up evaluation component.

10) NOTE: Academic honesty and integrity are to be maintained by all the students throughout the

semester and no type of academic dishonesty is acceptable.

Instructor-in-charge
Course No. PHA F212
