 

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

SECOND SEMESTER 2020-2021
Course Handout (Part II)
Date: 12/01/2021

In addition to Part I (General Handout for all courses appended to the time table) this portion gives
further specific details regarding the course.

Course No : PHA F266
Course Title : Study Project
Instructor-in-charge : Hemant R Jadhav

1. Scope and Objective of the course:

The course is specially designed to provide an opportunity to the students for development of their
academic skills and logical thinking through open ended study oriented activities. As a part of education,
this course follows a method of learning and therefore, the student's actual day-to-day task involvement
would constitute the central thread of the leaning process. The evaluation will recognize this aspect by
demanding day-to-day productivity and punctuality of the student.

2. Plan of Work:

The plan of work for each student will be decided by the respective Instructors. Each student should
adhere to the plan of work decided for and should regularly monitor the progress of the project
accordingly.

3. Evaluation Scheme:

S. No Components Weightage % Due Date
1, Project Outline & Plan of Work 10 30.1.2021
2. seminar I / Viva I 10 27.2.2021
Dn Mid-sem Report 10 16.3.2021
A. Mid-sem Seminar 15 19.3.2021
5. Final Report 25 27.4. 2021
6. Final Seminar and Viva 20 30.4. 2021
7, Weekly Interactions and Diary 10 30.4. 2021

4. Mid-semester grading:
Mid-semester grading will be done after Mid-semester seminar.

9. Grading Procedure:

In addition to what is mentioned in Part I of the handout, the grading will be done mainly on the basis
of the progress made towards attainment of the objectives and will recognize that each Instructor has
given specific task situation in which the student participates in a cognitive manner. Thus each

Save Paper. ;
we Save Trees.
* ASave the World. oe ee

Please Do Not Print Unless Necessary

 

 

    
 
 

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

Instructor will recommend a grade for his student for the consideration of the Instructor-in-charge. In a
specialized course of this nature the respective Instructor's assessment of the student vis-a-vis the
objective of the project would be the central criteria for arriving at final grade.

6. General:
It is the student's responsibility to ensure:
> Continuous interaction with the Instructor.
> Work to the satisfaction of the Instructor.
> Adherence to plan of work.
> Evaluation(s) to be completed by the due date and evaluation marks are communicated to the
Instructor-in- charge by due date.

7. Notices:
All notices pertaining to this course will be put up on the Pharmacy Notice Board.

8. Project Report:

A soft copy of the Mid-sem and the final report is required to be submitted to the Instructor-in-Charge
through your Instructor. Make sure that you submit your report on or before the deadline prescribed in
the handout.

Instructor-in-C harge
PHA F266

 

>= SSave the World. et oe
Please Do Not Print Unless Necessary

A sean a

 
