 

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

SECOND SEMESTER 2020-21
C ourse Handout (Part -II)
Date: 12/1/2021

In addition to Part- I (General Handout for all courses appended to the time table) this portion gives further
specific details regarding the course.

Course No. : PHA F491
Course Title : Special Projects
Instructor-in-charge : Hemant R Jadhav

1. Scope & Objective of the Course : This course aims at developing the basic concepts and understanding
of the specialized fields of pharmacy profession. It trains the students to apply their knowledge of the
fundamental principles in the development of formulations of drug products, of analytical methods, projects
on synthesis, microbiology and other similar projects of pharmaceutical & related applications.

2. Course Plan : The various types of the special projects under investigations are:
a) Development of Analytical methods for Drug substances

b) Design of sustained Release Dosage Formulations

c) Micro-encapsulation, Nano- particular formulation studies

d) Drugs in different formulations - their pharmacokinetic and stability studies.

e) Effects of various factors on Pharmaceutical Formulations

f) QSAR Studies, Computer Aided Drug Design, Related Computational studies

g) Synthesis of Bio-active Molecules

h) Microbiological and Immunological studies

i) Pharmacological Screening and Receptor Pharmacology

j) Pharmaceutical Management, Quality assurance

k) Phyto-chemical investigations and related studies

1) Any other related topic deemed fit

The plan of work for the specific projects in the above mentioned areas will be approved by the respective
instructors.

3. Evaluation Scheme:

Component Weightage Due date
Presentation of outline cum project proposal 10 2nd week
Mid semester work contribution 05 6th week
Mid semester seminar 15 9th week
Mid Sem. progress report 15 9th week
Overall contribution & sincerity 10 13th week
Final report * 29 15th week
Final Presentation 15 15th week
Day to Day Diary 05 continuous
Total 100

Save Paper. ;
ee Save Trees.
£ > Save the World. fg |

Please Do Not Print Unless Necessary

 

 
 

noel Po BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani

»
SC

e

z

Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

Marking scheme for Final Report * :

a) Literature survey 05
b) Experimental Work Results & Discussion 15
d) References 05

The mid-semester and end semester work may also be evaluated by another Instructor identified by the project
guide.

4. Notices: The Notices concerning this courses will be displayed on the Pharmacy Notice Board only.

Note:

It is the responsibility of the students registered for the course to meet the aforementioned deadlines and
submit reports periodically with the assigned Instructor. Students who do not meet the Instructors for more
than 10 days at a stretch without genuine reasons (as will be decided by the assigned Instructor), may not
clear the course.

Instructor-in-C harge
PHA F491

 

Save Paper.
2°) Save Trees.
£ > SSave the World.

Please Do Not Print Unless Necessary
