BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

SECOND SEMESTER 2020-21
COURSE HANDOUT

 

Date: 16.01.2021

In addition to part I (General Handout for all courses appended to the Time table) this portion gives further specific
details regarding the course.

Course No. : PHA F241

Course Title : Pharmaceutical Chemistry

Instructor-in-charge : Dr. Sandeep Sundriyal

Lab Instructors : Mr. Amritansh Bhanot, Ms. Sharyu Kesharwani, Mr. Ansari Imran K., Mr. Prabhjeet

singh, Mr. Amit Kumar

1. Course Description: This course deals with study of important classes of organic compounds such as alcohols, ethers,
esters, aldehydes etc and their reactions. The mechanisms for various reactions will also be dealt with to
comprehensively cover the basics of chemical reactions. Some important five and six member heterocycles with their
reactions will also be part of the course. This course also emphasizes the use of inorganic compounds in pharmacy.

2. Scope and Objective of the Course: The objective of the course is to teach fundamentals of organic chemistry as
applied to pharmaceutical and medicinal chemistry. This basic understanding is required to comprehend the advanced
concepts in pharmaceutical chemistry such as structure-activity relationships, synthetic chemistry, rational drug design,
retrosynthetic analysis, etc. After taking this course the students should be able to (i) explain the observed physical and
chemical properties of various FGs (ii) mechanistically explain important chemical reactions of various FGs such as
alcohols, amines, carbonyl compounds, etc. (iii) describe various reagents and reactions used to identify organic FGs
(iv) identify various heterocyclic rings and explain their common chemical reactions (v) describe medicinal properties
of selected inorganic compounds.

3. Text Books: L. G. Wade and Maya Shankar Singh, Organic Chemistry, Pearson, 6" Edition.

4, Reference Books:

1. J Clayden, N Greeves, and S Warren, Organic Chemistry, 2" Edition, Oxford University Press, South Asia
edition, 2001.

2. RT Morrison and R N Boyd Organic Chemistry PHI, 6" Edition

3. TW Grahm Soloman and Craig B Fryhle , Organic Chemistry, 8" Edition, John Wiley and Sons, New Y ork ,
2004.

4. KA Strohfeldt, Essentials of Inorganic Chemistry: For Students of Pharmacy, Pharmaceutical Sciences and
Medicinal Chemistry, John Wiley and Sons. New Y ork, 2015.

5. Vogel’s text book of Practical Organic Chemistry, V edition, Longman Scientific Publications, 1989

5. Course Plan:

Introduction and review; | TB 1.10A- Systematic nomenclature, General principles,
nomenclature and saturated branched and unbranched chain,
introduction to us alkene, alkyne, carbonyl, carboxylic acid,
functional halogens, amines etc.

a a
10.6, 10, 12. and various reactions
mr REST as [gute eee
13.1,13.2,13.5 | synthesis and cleavage, auto oxidation,
and aldehydes 12,14, 16, 21 and various reactions

 
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

RB 3: units 6,
10, 11

16-19 Chemistry of amines TB 17.3,5,6, Structure, preparation and reactions of nitro,
13, 15,20,22 nitrile, azide, amide, imine. Rearrangements
and reactions involving above

20-24 Chemistry of carboxylic | TB 19.9,15, Structure, synthesis and reactions of
acid and its derivatives | 20.1,5,9,10- carboxylic acids, malonic ester
20.
Condensation and alpha Keto enol tautomerism, Claisen condentation,
substitution of carbonyl .2,21.12- malonic ester synthesis,

compounds Cross Claisen, Michael addition
RB 3: unit 20

28-29 Free radical reactions RB 3: unit 37 | Structure, generation and fate of free radicals,
and free radical substitution reactions.

30-34 Heterocyclic compounds | RB 3: unit 29 | Identification and reactions of various 5/6membered and benzo-fused heterocyclic ring
systems

B: 4

35-40 Inorganic compoundin | R Selective examples of inorganic compounds
pharmacy with medicinal/diagnostic uses belonging to

alkali, alkaline earth metals, Group 13, 15,
Transition metals etc. Examples:
Gastrointestinal agents A cidifying agents,
antacids, protective and absorbents, saline
cathartics), Radiopharmaceutical used in
medicine etc.

6. Practicum experience:

Experiments No of practical hours References/
chapters

Solubility characterization of | Asin timetable Different chapters of text book/
organic compounds, qualitative reference books

tests for various organic

functional groups

7. Evaluation Scheme:

(% ) (Close Book/ O pen Book)
/ Mid-SemTest [90min [30 CB
Continuous assessment* 35 Continuous Class Quiz (CB)
evaluation (CB)
35

ComprehensiveExam | 120min | 35 ~~ | 02/05 AN CB and/or OB

* Continuous assessment will be based on class tests/practicum components/viva, etc. (announced or surprise)

 

 

 

 

 

8. Chamber C onsultation Hour: To be announced in class. Prior appointment via Email is strongly encouraged.

9. Notices: Due to the ongoing mode of online teaching all notices concerning this course will be displayed Google
Classroom or will be communicated via emails. Students should make sure that their official Email accounts are working
and are expected to their check inbox regularly.
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

 

 

10. Make-up Policy: Generally, make-up is considered in exceptional circumstances and only for regular students (~
in lecture classes). Prior permission for all make-up applications is a must. The application must
accompany supporting documents to the satisfaction of IC..

11. NOTE(s):

1. Quiz(zes) may/will be conducted as a part of evaluation component, at random, during contact hours including
lecture, tutorial hours, as convenient, with/without prior intimation and sometimes outside class contact hours
(for both theory and practical) and hence it is expected that the students come prepared to every class on topics
covered in earlier contact hours. Regular classes will be held in designated tutorial hour to maintain continuity.

2. For practical sessions, only procedure/methodology would be provided. Students must come prepared with
the theoretical background for the experiments which would be covered in theory classes. Viva voce may
be conducted during the practical session on regular basis.

3. Itis strongly advised that all students prepare their own class notes and relevant information during lectures or
from text/reference books. During ‘open-book’ exams/tests photocopies/printed material, loose/stapled
sheets, will not be allowed.

4, Forall evaluation components, information given during classroom instruction, aforementioned text books and
reference books in the same order, will be considered as correct. Students are advised to follow the text,
reference material as given in hand-out.

5. All evaluation components are equally important, irrespective of weightage. Hence, students failing to
attend scheduled classes, or absenting themselves in one or many of the evaluation components, may become
ineligible for obtaining a valid grade at the end of the semester. Attendance in lectures, tutorials and practicum
experience are all equally important as they are all integral components of learning, irrespective of weightage
and may be taken into consideration, during grading, especially in borderline cases

6. Clearing the course would require adequate performance in all evaluation components (quizzes, tests,
examinations, and in practicum experience, etc.), separately (i.e. procuring low marks in evaluation
components, aforementioned, would not suffice, to clear the course).

  

Instructor-in-charge: Dr. Sandeep Sundriyal
Course No. PHA F241
