BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

 

SECOND SEMESTER 2020-21
COURSE HANDOUT
Date: 10.03.2021

In addition to part I (General Handout for all courses appended to the Time table) this portion gives further
specific details regarding the course.

Course Number _ : PHA G611

Course Title : Advanced Pharmacology
Instructor In-charge: Prof. Rajeev Taliyan
Instructors :  Sarathlal KC, Violina K

Tutorial/Practical Instructors: : Sarathlal KC, Violina K

1. Course Description: Latest advancement/developments in the areas of Pharmacology &
Therapeutics will be discussed under this course.

2. Scope and objective of the course:

The course intends to discuss the latest developments in Pharmacology, clinical Drugs and Therapeutics.
This course also emphasizes on the molecular aspects of pharmacology, its relations to recent development
in therapeutics including of all-important branches - including epigenetics, Stem cell and gene therapy
Special emphasis is given to neuro-pharmacology and cellular basis for various pharmacological functions
including neuro-prosthetics as well as bio-medical instrumentation.

3. Text Book: Goodman & Gilman’s “The Pharmacological basis of Therapeutics; McGraw
Hill, 12th edition, 2011. ( 13 edition is also available online)

4, Reference Books:

1) Betram G. Katzung “Basic & Clinical Pharmacology” McGraw-Hill/Appleton & Lange; 11th edition,
2009

2) Anthony J. Trevor, Bertram G. Katzung, Susan B. “Katzung’s Pharmacology: Examination and
Board Review “Master McGraw- Hill/A ppleton & Lange; 6th edition, August, 2001

3) Mary Julia, Richard A. Harvey, Pamela C. Champe“Lippincott’s Illustrated Reviews: Pharmacology”
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2nd edition, January, 2000

4) H. P. Rang; M. M. Dale, J. M. Ritter, Phyllis Gardner, “Pharmacology” Churchill Livingstone; 6th
edition, 2007

Additional information:

e Emerging trends and updates have to be obtained from selected journals; hence it is mandatory to refer the
journals and review articles .

¢ Students should go through the following journals regularly on current research in areas related to the
course topics.
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

1. Annual Reviews of Pharmacology series.

3. Neuropharmacology

9. Drug Discovery Today: Disease Mechanism
7. Biochemical Pharmacology

9, Pharmacology Biochemistry and Behavior

5. Course Plan:

Module No. Lecture Session

1-2) ntroduction

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani

 

2. Trends in Pharmacological sciences.
A, Current Opinion in Pharmacology

6. European Neuropsychopharmacology
8. Vascular Pharmacology

10. Indian Journal of Pharmacology

Text

Book/Ref.
text book:
C hap/ sec

Learning outcomes

L-1: (1-2) ADME, Principles of Pharmacology, | Understand and study the | TB:1-3 and
to Pharmacokinetics & | Pharmacodynamics basic concept of P,cology | Class notes
Pharmacodynamics

L: (3-4)Principle of
drug action, dose
response relationships
L-2: (5-8)Receptor ligand interactions,
signal pathways,
putative-role of
neurotransmitters,

: (11-15

Pharmacology of
cardiovascular (CV S)
and Renal system

Molecular mechanism, Receptor,
Classification, Drug Interaction.

Signal transduction, Secondary
Messengers, serotonergic,
cholinergic, adrenergic,
dopaminergic systems

Understand the type of | TB:5,8-14;
mol signaling and drug _ | Ref. 4
action
TB:5,8-14;
Ref.1, 2, 3
and 4;
Class notes

L3: (9-10) Toxicology | Principle of toxicology, OECD Understand and study the | TB:4; Class

studies. Guidelines and regulation of guidelines, regulation of | notes
Toxicology studies. Toxicology studies.

A: ( )

Cardio vascular and renal
Pharmacology, Recent advancement
for the management of
hypertension, congestive heart
failure, angina pectoris, myocardial

Understanding the latest
management of CVS
diseases

infarction and kidney disease

LA: (16-22)
Pharmacotherapy of
nervous system

, Parkinson disease
disorder/disease

L5: (23
25) Introduction,
Metabolic and
respiratory Disorders | COPD/Asthma
L6: (26-28) Digestive
system and related
disorders- including

cancer biology and blood cancer)

Principles of Psychopharmacology,
epilepsy, depression, schizophrenia,
mania, Insomnia, Alzheimer and

Diabetes mellitus, obesity/Insulin
resistance and respiratory disorders
Patho- physiology of ulcers;
Advancement for the management
of ulcer and cancer (G.I.T, Breast

TB:1516,21,22;
Ref. land 4;
Class notes

Understanding the pathophysiology and latest
management of CNS

diseases

Study and understanding | TB:31,36,4

the Therapeutic advances | 3,44;
in DM, Asthmas and Ref.1and 4;
COPD Class notes

Study and understanding | TB:45-47,
the Therapeutic advances | ;Ref.1 and 4
for cancer management | and Class
notes

 
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

L7; (29-31) Recent advances in treatment of Recent advances in TB: 48-63;
Introduction to infectious disease and in particular treatment of infectious | Class notes
Infectious disease and | Nosocomial infections, strategies to disease Ref. 4
their management combat microbial resistance and drugs (Sth generation

in the pipeline (TB, Covid- 19) cephalosporins)
L8:: (32-35) Role of Pharmacogenetics, Therapeutic relevance of | TB:7; SELF
Pharmacogenetics, epigenetics and Gene therapy in gene modification,
epigenetics, gene disease and disorders epigenetics
therapy in health.
L9 (36- Advancement for Sensory, motor Therapeutic Tb:64;
40) Introduction to bio- | and cognitive prosthetics, bio- Advancement for Class notes,
medical medical aids in rehabilitation bio-medical aids in Self Study
instrumentation and therapy. rehabilitation
neuro- prosthetics

L10:(40-43) Buffer Buffer lecture hours-Few topics may Class notes
lecture spill over from plan based on
discussions, conduct of quiz, etc.

6. Evaluation Scheme:

Component Duration | Weightage Date & Time Nature of component
(% ) (Close Book/ ene Book)

Sommaire oS)
Examination
2p
assessment

* Continuous assessment may include quiz(zes)# Laboratory, Day to Day work, Viva-Voce, Home assignment, and
Lab. component including Lab. Compre., etc.

Home Assignments, Quiz(zes) etc. will be based on advanced topics in pharmacology & pharmacotherapy.
Assignment(s) may be practical / theory oriented for which two copies of type-written report in a standard format

should be submitted as per deadline(s) that would be announced, therein. It may also include a viva and or a seminar
presentation

 

 

7. Chamber C onsultation Hour: time to be announced in class.

Notices: concerning the course will be displayed on the Pharmacy Department notice board only.

9, Make-Ups: Make- Ups are not given as a routine. It is solely dependent upon the GENUINENESS OF
The CIRCUMSTANCES under which a student fails to appear in a scheduled evaluation component. In

such circumstances, prior permission should be obtained from the Instructor-in-Charge. The decision of the
Instructor- in-Charge will be final.

10. Note (if any):

Instructor-in-charge
Course No. PHA G 611
