 

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

AUGS/ AGSR Division Date: 16/01/2021

Second- SEMESTER 2020-2021
Course Handout (Part IT)

Course No. : PHA F 214
Course Title : Anatomy, Physiology and Hygiene
Instructor-in-charge : Prof. Rajeev Taliyan

Team of Instructors : Sarath Lal KC, Salunkhe Shubham A, Shreya Das, Mahipal Reddy D, Violina
Kakoty
1. Course Description:

Anatomical study of the important organs of human body; physiology of various functional systems of
human body; general principles of personal and community hygiene and prevention of communicable
diseases.

2. Scope and Objectives:
This course imparts knowledge of anatomy (the study of internal structures of the human body and their

inter-relationships) and physiology (study of functions of various structures and organ systems of the human
body) in healthy and diseased states. It also deals with general principles of personal and community hygiene
for the prevention of various communicable diseases.

3. Text book: Marieb, Elaine N, Essentials of Human Anatomy & Physiology, Pearson
Edu., 9th ed.,2009
4, Reference Books:
R-1:Taylor DJ, Green NPO and Strout (eds.) Biological Science, 3rd Edition, Cambridge
University Press, London, 2000.
R-2:Guyton & Hall, Textbook of Medical Physiology, 9" edition, WB Saunders
Company, (Indian edition), 1998.

R-3:Gerard J. Tortora, Bryan H. Derricks on Principles of Anatomy and Physiology, 12th
Edition: 2011

R-4:Park K, Textbook of Preventive and Social Medicine, 16 Edition, M/s Banarasidas

 

Save Paper.
ae) Save Trees.
£ > Save the World.

innovate

Please Do Not Print Unless Necessary
 

Pilani Campus

 

 

Course Plan:
A: Theory Component

Module No Lecture Session

1: L 1: 1-2: Definition,

Introduction, | Scope and common

Cell and terms used in Anatomy
and Physiology:
Cell: Parts and their
functions
L1: 3-5: Tissue: Types,
differences,
characteristics and
properties of tissues,
Bone and types of Joints

Tissue

2: General L2: 6-12: Blood:
introduction of | Composition and
Blood, its functions of blood,
composition and | Function of RBC, WBC
functions and Platelet

3: Introduction of | L4: 13-15: Exocrine and
Endocrine system | endocrine glands:

L4:16-17 General
properties of endocrine
glands and hormones

L4: 18-21 Pituitary
gland, Thyroid gland
,Adrenal gland, Pancreas
and its related disorders.

A: Introduction to | L5:22-24: Organs of

Respiratory Respiratory system,

system Physiological Process of
respiration

 

A Save Paper.
gy) Save Trees.
£ P= &Save the World.

AUGS/ AGSR Division

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani

Leaming Outcome

Understand and study , Anatomy and
Physiology, Cell and Tissue: Types,
differences, characteristics and
properties of tissues,

Study the changes/modulation during

adverse condition

Study and understand the composition
and functions of blood

cells., Understand the synthesis of blood
cells in bone marrow, their hormonal
regulation and modulation for
maintenance of physiological balanc

Understand the endocrine glands, their
secretion i.e hormones, physiological
functions of each glands hormones

Understand the role and function of
Pituitary gland, Thyroid gland, Adrenal
gland and Pancreas

Understand the respiratory organ and
their role in respiration process, tidal
volume, Expiratory, inspiratory reserve
volume, respiratory disorders-COPD
and Asthma

 

innovate achieve

Please Do Not Print Unless Necessary
 
   
    
   
     
 
 
     

5: Introduction of
Cardiovascular
system:, anatomy
and Physiological
function of Heart

6: : Introduction
to Digestive
system

7: Reproductive
system

8: Urinary system

   
 

8:Introduction of
Nervous system

9: Special senses

Save Paper.

 
  
 

L3:25-26: Anatomy of
heart

L3:27-29: Physiology of
heart, Blood vessels,
ECG, related CVS
disorders i.e Blood
pressure, MI &
thrombosis

L6: 30-32: Organs of Ch-T- 23

digestive system

L6:39-43: Other allied
organs, Process of
digestion of food

L7: 33-35: Male
reproductive system,
Female reproductive
system, New
techniques in
reproductive medicine

L8:36-37: Anatomy of
urinary system, Urine
formation and diseases
of kidney

L 8: 38-39General
aspect of Neurology,
Brain and spinal cord,
Nervous System,

T-1: Ch
Notes

L8 39-40: Classification
of NS, Physiological
role of NS

L9:41-42: Special Ch-T-15

senses- Vision,

Special senses- Hearing,
Taste, and Smell

A Save Trees.
£ © SSave the World.

 

11-14 and

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

Understand the anatomy and
Physiological function of heart

Study and understand hormonal and
Nervous system regulation of heart.

Understand the abnormalities related to
heart physiology ( Blood pressure, MI
& thrombosis)

Understand and study the organ of
digestive system, process of digestion,
Hormonal and nervous system
Regulation of digestion process,
digestive disorders

Understand the organ of Male and
Female reproductive system,
physiological process of reproduction.
Spermatogenesis and oogenesis process,
STD.

Understand the organ of urinary system,
Physiological process of kidney, urine
formation, GFR, creatinine clearance

    
  
  

Understand the General aspect of
Nervous System, Physiological role of
Peripheral, Central and A utonomic
Nervous System

  

Understand the process of vision,
Hearing, Taste and smell

 

innovate

Ele

Please Do Not Print Unless Necessary
 

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 
   

L10: 43-44: Air bore R-4:Book | Understand the Anthrax, dengue fever,
diseases, Viral diseases | No 3:Ch- | Tuberculosis, COVID-19, prevention
and Water borne 5.Notes and their management.

diseases

Experiments: Bone, Blood, CVS, Different chapters of text
book/ practical book 10-12 Experiments for each

CNS,reproductive and respiratory .
laboratory section
system etc

Evaluation Scheme:

Weightage
Evaluation Component | Duration
—

Continuous assessment* oe

* Continuous assessment oe include quiz(zes)/Tutorial# Laboratory - Day to Day work and viva (08 M)
and Lab Compre and quiz(zes) (08): Viva-V oce and Home assignment /seminar etc.

 

It is strongly advised that all students prepare their own class notes and relevant information from
text, reference material, as in handouts would only be allowed for consultation during assessments
of open book/notes.* Slides used during class hours provide key information for which additional
supportive information is expected to be collected from sources aforementioned. These slides will
not be shared and hence students are requested/advised to make their own notes during class hour.
Recent developments in the area/topic will be discussed in class based on their significance to
healthcare delivery and hence some information on therapeutic benefits and toxicity effects, besides
others, may differ from the information in text, reference material and hence students are expected to
take note of such key discussions during contact hours. Such discussions held in class will be
considered as primary source of information in assessments.

Practicum experience ( Lab. component), Assignment(s) may be practical / theory oriented, for which a
proper report in a standard format should be submitted as per deadline(s) that would be announced. It may
also include a viva and or seminar presentation(s).

 

 

Save Paper.
\ Save Trees.
£2= ‘Save the World. a re

Please Do Not Print Unless Necessary
 

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

 

 

Quiz(zes) may/will be conducted as a part of evaluation component, at random, during contact hours
including lecture, tutorial hours, as convenient, with/without prior intimation and sometimes outside class
contact hours ( for both theory and practical) and hence it is expected that the students come prepared to
every class on topics covered in earlier contact hours. Regular classes will be held in designated tutorial
hour to maintain continuity.

7, Chamber consultation hours: time to be announced in class.
8. Notices: Notices concerning the course will be displayed on the Pharmacy Department notice

board only.

9, Make-Ups: Make-Ups are not given as a routine. It is solely dependent upon the Genuineness of the
Circumstances under which a student fails to appear in a scheduled evaluation component. In such
circumstances, prior permission should be obtained from the Instructor-in-Charge. In no case the make-up
letter be slipped inside the chamber of the Instructor-In-Charge. The decision of the Instructor- in-Charge
will be final.

Instructor-in-charge
PHA F 214

 

A Save Paper.
ee) Save Trees.
£°* Save the World.

innovate

Please Do Not Print Unless Necessary
