BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
Instruction Division

 

 

Course Handout Part-I]
18" January 2021

Course Number : PHY F242
Course Title : QUANTUM MECHANICS - I
Instructor-in-charge: Niladri Sarkar

Objective and Scope of the C ourse:

Quantum Mechanics-I is an introduction to the mechanics of atomic and sub-atomic systems. The course is
roughly divided into two parts. The first part (module 1 to 5) deal with the rudiments of wave mechanics and
apply the same to some simple systems that will help clarify the novelty of quantum mechanical concepts.
The second part (module 6 and 7) will then elaborate on the formal structure of quantum mechanics that will
lay strong foundations for the advanced courses.

Text and reference books :
1. Quantum Mechanics by B H Bransden and C J Joachain (BJ) 2" Edition Pearson Education
2. Introductory Quantum Mechanics by Richard L Liboff (RL) 4“ Edition Pearson Education
3. Introduction to Quantum Mechanics by David J Griffiths (DG) 2" Edition Pearson Education
4, Principles of Quantum Mechanics by R. Shankar Second Edition Springer

Note : The organization of the course are mainly followed from BJ, however the students are highly

suggested to consult RL, DG and RS as well.
Learning Outcome

1. The Wave L1-L4 : Wave-particle

Function

Duality, Interpretation of Realization the meaning of Wavefunction
the W avefunction

Understanding the Application of Fourier
L5-L7 : Real and Analysis which permits to express an
2. Wave packets |/Momentum Space 4 llarbitrary wavefunction as a superposition of
W avefunctions
Harmonic W aves.

3. The L8-L10: Uncertainty 2.5 Understanding of the Mathematical
Heisenberg Relation for Momentum Properties of the Waves that Describe

 

 

Save Paper.
me) Save Trees.
> -ASave the World. hte achieve

Please Do Not Print Unless Necessary
 
  
 

Pilani Campus
Instruction Division

and Energy and time,
Expectation Values,
Momentum and Position as
Operators, Measurements
in Quantum Mechanics

L10 - L20: The timedependent Schrodinger
equation, The Ehrenfest
Theorem, Stationary States,

L20 - L30 : Free Particle,
The Potential Step, The
Potential Barrier, Infinite
Square Well, Linear
Harmonic Oscillator, The
Periodic Potential

L30 - L38: Axiomatic
Formulations , Schrodinger 5.1 — 5.8.
and Heisenberg Pictures

Class

notes

from
various
sources

L38 - L42 : The Harmonic
Oscillator, Eigenvectors
and Eigenvalue of a
General Hamiltonian.

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani

Quantum- Mechanical Particles.

Understanding the Time-dependent and
Time-Independent Schrodinger Equation

Understanding of the Applications of TimeIndependent Schrodinger Equation

Students should be enough
prepared/motivated to understand abstract
language/ advanced topics of quantum
mechanics

Students will be learning to solve eigenvalue
equations by means of a general and elegant
operator method.

Duration eightage |/Date, Time & _ |\Nature of
(%)

Mid Term Test 90 mins.
0

ef —_

 

Save Paper.
Save Trees.

f° Agave the World.

Closed Book

 

innovate

Please Do Not Print Unless Necessary
 
 
   

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
Instruction Division

Open/Closed
Book

Notices: Notices/assignements/solutions etc. will be displayed only on Nalanda.

Make-up Policy: No Make-up for tutorial tests. Make up for regular tests will be given only to genuine cases
(obviously), i.e.(i) Serious Sickness (ii) out-of-station with prior intimation to / permission from the IC.

Instructor-in-Charge

PHY F242

 

Save Paper. > am
ge) Save Trees. i
£ > ASave the World. Pe

innovate |
Please Do Not Print Unless Necessary
