 

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
Instruction Division

 

Second Semester 2020-2021
Course Handout (Part-lIl)

 

Date: 18/01/2021

In addition to Part | (General Handout for all courses appended to the Time Table), this portion
gives further specific details regarding the course.

Course No. : PHY F491
Course Title : Special Projects
Instructor-in-Charge : RAKESH CHOUBISA

Course Description

This is an unstructured and open-ended course, in which under the overall supervision of an
instructor-in-charge, batches of students will be attached to different instructors. Each batch will
work on a specific time-bound project, which is of basic or peripheral concern of his / her
discipline. Each student must submit a project report as a culmination of his endeavour and
investigation. The instructor-in-charge will determine the choice of the project and also whether
or not the project report is to be submitted jointly by a group or individually by a student. The
course will aim to evaluate student’s actual ability to use the fundamentals of knowledge and to
meet new unknown situations as demonstrated by the students’ interaction with the instructors
and instructor-in-charge and aggregated in the project report. The instructor-in-charge may assign
specific hours for formal brainstorming sessions.

Scope & Objective

The objective of this course is to train the students to apply their knowledge of the fundamental
principles to the problems faced in the field or their own interest and to meet the objectives of
additional competence by them.

Evaluation Scheme

1. | Project Title &PlanofWork |S 20.02.2020
2. | Written Presentation! |S 20.02.2020
3. | Seminar-t/Vivel
(4 | Written Presentation
(5. | Seminar-/Vival
(6 | FimalReport
7. ____| Weekly Interaction and Diary
8. | FinalSeminarand Viva

1.
2.
3.
4,
5.
7.

 

 

Save Paper. ;
Ss ase Trees.
£ * s$ave the World. innovate achieve

Please Do Not Print Unless Necessary
 

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
Instruction Division

 

 

Chamber Consultation Hour
To be fixed and announced during the first interaction after registration.

Mid-Semester Grading
Mid-Semester grading will be done on the basis of the evaluation components 1 — 5 (refer the EC No. in the
Evaluation Scheme tabled above).

Grading Procedure

In addition to what is mentioned in Part-l of handout, the grading will be done mainly on the basis of the
progress made towards attainment of the project objectives and will recognize that each Instructor has
given specific task situation in which the student participates in a cognitive manner. Thus each Instructor
will recommend a grade for his student, for the consideration of the Instructor-in-charge. In a specialized
courses of this nature the respective Instructor’s assessment of the student vis-a-vis the objective of the
project would be the central criterion for arriving at final grade.

Notices
All notices concerning this course will be displayed on the Physics Department Notice Board only.

Make-up Policy
No make-up is granted without prior permission and valid justification.

General
It is the student’s responsibility to ensure:
e Continuous interaction with the Instructor
e Work to the satisfaction of the Instructor
e Adherence to plan of work
e Evaluation(s) to be completed by the due date and evaluation marks are communicated to the
Instructor-in-charge by due date.

Instructor-in-charge
PHY F491

 
 

Save Paper.
= Save Trees.
* “$$ave the World. innovate

Please Do Not Print Unless Necessary

 
