BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, PILANI
INSTRUCTION DIVISION
SECOND SEMESTER 2018-2019

Course Handout (Part-II)
Date: 15/01/2021

In addition to part I (General handout for all courses appended to the timetable) this portion gives further details regarding the
course.

Course Number : PHY F243

Course Title : Mathematical Methods of Physics
Instructor-in-Charge : R.R. Mishra

Scope & Objective of the Course:

This course covers some special mathematical techniques used in physics. It covers vectors and tensors, linear vector spaces,
complex variables and contour integration, Sturm-Liouville problem of ordinary differential equations, partial differential
equations of physics.

Text Book:

Mathematical Methods for Physicists, G.B. Arfken, H.J. Weber and F.E. Harris, 7“ Ed.
Elsevier, 2013

Reference Books:

Mathematics for Physicists, Philippe Dennery and Andre Krzywicki, Dover Books, 1996

Course Plan

Lecture No. | Learning Objectives Topics to be C overed Learning Outcome! Reference to Text
and Reference Book
1—
Bn

Review of Vector he Del operator, Gradient, Divergence [Io give a quick Ch 3 (3.1 — 3.6)
Algebra and Vector and Curl operations on scalars and review of vector
Calculus ectors, Use of Kronecker Delta, Levi- _jalgebra and calculus.

Civita symbol and Einstein summation

convention in proving vector identities.

4
12

Tensors in Cartesian |Scalar, vectors and tensors under o learn Ch. 4 (4.1 — 4.4)
and curvilinear rotation of coordinate axes, Tensorsin __ transformation of
coordinates. general curvilinear coordinates. tensors and tensor

13-17 Calculus of Variation.
maxima, More general variations.

18-21 ector Spaces | Linear vector spaces, inner product and
Gram-Schmidt orthogonalization, Linear |concepts of vector
operators, Self adjoint and unitary
operators, Matrix representation of
operators.

22—25 ector Spaces II Eigenvalues and Eigenvectors of linear [To be able to find
operators, diagonalization of matrices. _ eigenvalues and

 
patric p

Complex variables _ {Singularities of a complex function, 0 be able to Ch. 11 (11.6 — 11.8)
Calculus of residues, Evaluation of calculate definite
definite integrals, Branch points and integrals by using
branch cuts. contour integration

Partial differential
equations. Laplace, Poisson, Wave and Heat
equation.

Green Functions Green functions in one, two and three
dimensions. partial differential
equations by Green
function technique.

 

Evaluation Scheme

valuation C omponent Duration §—*([Weightage ~=3—SsDate & Time ature of Test
Mid- Semester Test 90 Minutes losed Book

partly open
Tutorial Tests (3) and Home 30% (15+15) Fo be announced Posed Book
Assignments (4) minutes each utorial Tests
Chamber C onsultation Hour: To be announced in the class.
Notices: Notices and solutions will be displayed only on PHY SIC S/FDIII notice board.

Make-up Policy [STRICT] No Make-ups for tutorial tests. Make up for regulartests will he given only to gent
(i) Sickness leading to hospitalization, (ii) out-of-station with prior intimation to / permission from the IC.

 

    

Instructor-in-C harge
PHY F243
