BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

SECOND SEMESTER 2020-21
COURSE HANDOUT

 

Date: 15.01.2021

In addition to part I (General Handout for all courses appended to the Time table) this portion gives further
specific details regarding the course.

Course No : PHY F215

Course Title : Introduction to Astronomy & Astrophysics
Instructor-in-C harge : Kaushar Vaidya

Instructor(s) : Kaushar Vaidya

T utorial/Practical Instructors: NA
1. Course Description:

This course is an introductory course in Astronomy and Astrophysics. The course covers all the topics in
the field of stellar astrophysics, and selected topics in the Galactic Astronomy.

2. Scope and Objective of the C ourse:

This course will mainly introduce a student to the field of Stellar Astrophysics. The course will begin with a quick
review of the history of Astronomy, followed by a discussion of basic concepts of Observational Astronomy, and
familiarize a student with various tools of Astronomy such as telescopes, detectors, and techniques involved in multiwavelength astronomy.

The course shall deal with topics in Stellar Astrophysics in four broad categories: Stellar atmospheres (outer layers of
stars), Stellar interiors and Stellar Structure, Stellar Evolution, and End States of Stars.

Stellar atmospheres are the only directly observable layers of stars. We can study stellar atmospheres by obtaining
spectra of stars. In this course, we will learn how to interpret stellar spectra using the laws of Physics. We will learn
how to derive abundances of elements in the stellar atmospheres from stellar spectra as well as how to obtain different
estimates of the “surface” temperatures of stars.

We cannot observe interiors of stars directly. We build models of stars using the basic observations of stars and check
our models against some of the unique observations possible only for our closest star (the Sun). In stellar structure and
interiors, we will study how stars produce their energy, how they maintain their equilibrium, how they transport
energy in their interiors as well as to the outside. We will make use of the most detailed observations of our closest
star, the Sun, to check if our models are correct (i.e. the energy production by nuclear fusion, the radiative/convective
structure of star, the temperature profile etc.)

If we had only one star at our disposal to study and learn about the working of stars, we certainly would not be able to
make a headway. The theory of stellar evolution, which is one of the most successful theories of Astrophysics, is a
study of stellar systems, such as star clusters to know different stages in stars' evolution. As stars evolve, they
undergo changes in their cores as a result of nuclear fusion. These changes demand that star constantly makes
adjustments to remain in mechanical and thermal equilibrium, as well as maintain its output. Eventually stars exhaust
their core Hydrogen which marks the end of stars main-sequence life. Stars consume their nuclear fuel at different
rates and have their main-sequence lifetimes as varied as a few million years (the most massive stars) to tens of
billions of years (the lowest mass stars). Star clusters provide us samples of stars that are similar to one another in
terms of their chemical abundances, kinematics, and distance from the Sun. In stellar evolution, by studying these
collective, coeval, samples of stars, we will learn about the various stages that stars would go through post mainsequence, and see the observational correspondence for each of these phases.
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

 

 

Most stars would end as white-dwarfs, some stars would end as neutron stars, and a small fraction of stars would end
up as black holes. In neither of these phases, would star produce any nuclear energy. Moreover, a strange form of

pressure would support stars in these end phases against gravity. We will learn about the strange physical properties
of stars when they are in their end states. Apart from studying the physics of these objects, we will also learn about
how these objects are observed.

3. Text Books: "An Introduction to Modern Astrophysics" by Bradley Carroll & Dale Ostlie, Second Edition,
Pearson (Addison Wesley), 2007

4, Reference Books: "The Physical Universe" by Frank Shu, University Science Books, 1982
"Astrophysics For Physicists” by Arnab Rai Choudhuri, Cambridge University Press, 2010

9. Course Plan:

Lecture Topics to be Learning Outcome Reference
Number covered

1. History History of The Big Questions of Ancient Astronomy Chapter 1
Astronomy

2. Concepts in Celestial Mechanics; How to label a celestial object, a star ora Ch.1 (S 1.3);
Astronomy Distances in galaxy by its coordinates Ch. 3 (S 3.1, 3.2,
Astronomy; 3.6)
Magnitude Scale; Different coordinate systems and their pros

Color-index and cons

Parallax method of determining distances
to the nearest stars

Magnitude scale to relate the apparent
brightness of stars

Color-index and its use as a temperature

indicator

3. Telescopes 4-5 (2) Basic Optics; Optical Important parameters in designs of Chapter 6

Telescopes; Radio telescopes

Telescopes;

Infrared, Ultraviolet, Different kinds of detectors

X-ray, and Gamma
Ray Astronomy Multi-wavelength Astronomy and their use =
4. Stellar Spectra Maxwell-Boltzmann Using results from Statistical Mechanics Chapter 8

distribution, branch of Physics, learning how to

Bolzmann equation, determine average velocity for a large

Saha equation, number of particles

Formation of

Spectral Lines,H-R Determining probabilities of particles being

Diagram, Luminosity in different excitation levels in an atom

 
 

5. Stellar
Atmospheres

6. Interiors of

Stars

 

10-13 (4)

14-21 (8)

Description of
Radiation Field,
Stellar Opacity,
Radiative Transfer,
Transfer Equation

Hydrostatic
Equilibrium,
Pressure Equation
of State, Stellar
Energy Sources,
Energy Transport,
Main Sequence

 

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

using Boltzmann equation

Determining probabilities of particles being
in different ionization levels using Saha
equation

Spectral line formation

Different kinds of spectra, classification of
stars into nine classes

The most important diagram of stellar
astrophysics: H-R diagram

Definitions of radiation field: specific Chapter 9

intensity, flux, energy density

How to write an expression for loss in
intensity due to absorption processes

How to write an expression for gain in
intensity due to emission processes

Transfer Equation and special solutions
(Interpretation of Kirchoff’s laws)

Different contributors to

absorption/emission: bound-bound, bound
free, free-free transitions, electron
scattering

Learning concepts such as Local
Thermodynamic Equilibrium (Mean Free
Path, Temperature Scale Height)

How pressure-gradient (gas and radiative) Chapter 10

balances the weight and ensures stability of
stars

Energy sources of stars: gravitational,
chemical, nuclear

p-p chain and CNO chain of Hydrogen
fusion

Binding Energy per nucleon
Energy Transfer: Radiation and convection

Stellar Models: Stellar Structure Equations,
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

Solar Interiors, Solar Evolution of Sun on the main-sequence Chapter 11
Neutrino Problem,
Solar Atmospheres Solar neutrino problem, its solution, and

implications

Solar atmospheres: Photosphere,
Chromosphere, Corona

Solar Magnetic Cycle, sunspots

8. Stellar 25-27 (3) Stages of Stellar Subgiant branch, Red giant branch, Chapter 13
Evolution Evolution, Stellar Asymptotic giant branch, Horizontal
Clusters branch, Planetary nebulae
Stellar Clusters, Open clusters, Globuler
clusters

9. Stellar 28-30 (3) Evolution of massive Two kinds of Supernovae Chapter 15
Evolution stars, Supernovae,
Gamma-Ray bursts Gamma-Ray bursts

10. 31-35 (4) | White Dwarfs, The case of Sirius-B Chapter 16
Chandrasekhar
Degenerate Limit, Neutron Stars, White dwarfs
Remnant Stars Pula
Fermi Energy
The physics of degenerate matter
The Chandrasekhar limit
Cooling of White dwarfs
Neutron Stars
Pulsars

6. Evaluation Scheme:

Component Duration | Weightage Date & Time Nature of component
(% ) (Close Book/ O pen Book)
Mid-Semester Test <TEST 1> Closed/Open
<TEST C> Closed/Open
in. 30

 

Comprehensive 3h
Examination

Weekly Quiz _10Min. | 30 | Throughout | Closed

 

7. Chamber C onsultation Hour: TBA
8. Notices: On Nalanda.

9, Make-up Policy: Very Strict. Only to the most genuine cases as judged by the IC.
4
BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, Pilani
Pilani Campus
AUGS/ AGSR Division

 

 

10. Note (if any):

Instructor-in-charge
Course No.
